A parish that is almost 1,000
years old must, of necessity,
have a very interesting history.
In the moulding of this absorbing
history, Danes, Normans, Anglo-
Saxons, played a big part, together
with the native Irish of this ancient
parish.
Old St. Michan's, Founded A.D. 1095
Eighty years after the crushing defeat
sustained at the battle of Clontarf, a
large colony of Danes on the north
bank of the Liffey who had been
converted to Christianity, built a church
which they dedicated to St. Michan
a Danish Saint. The site selected was
just a short distance from the only
bridge that spanned the Liffey then
—the site of the present Protestant
edifice in Church Street. From its
first days, old St. Michan's had a very
close connection with Christ's Church
Cathedral. The Prior of Christ's Church
selected the priest who would have
charge of the parish ; then the name of
the priest thus selected was forwarded
to the Archbishop, who formally appointed
the priest recommended. For
almost five hundred years, this historic
church was the centre of Catholic devotion
on the north side of Dublin ;
it was the only parish church north
of the Liffey.
There the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass
was offered up; there the consolations
Street, Dublin
of the Sacrament of Penance were given
to the people of the parish ; from this
church were brought to the sick and
dying the Holy Viaticum and the Holy
Oils of Extreme Unction. Undisturbed
by heresy, old St. Michan's pursued its
divine mission, till an English Monarch,
Henry VIII, to gratify his pride and
lust, declared himself head of the
Church throughout his own dominions.
Suppressing the monasteries throughout
England and Ireland, he made no
exception of the Dominican monastery
near Church Street Bridge, which for
well over 200 years had brought many
blessings to the people. He tried to
force Bishops and priests to give up
their allegiance to the Vicar of Christ
in Rome, and to recognise him by oath
as head of the Church in these islands.
Though he essayed to demolish the
influence of the Pope throughout his
own kingdom, still he upheld the
teaching of the Church regarding the
Real Presence, Transubstantiation, and
the Seven Sacraments. In old St.
Michan's, one change was effected by
Henry VIII. Having forced a secular
Dean and Chapter on the community
of Christ Church, he took away from
this chapter the right to appoint vicars
to St. Michan's ; and he gave the
church an independent status and a
parish priest, John Kerdiff, who was
a devout priest. Through Henry's
reign, as also through that of Edward VI and Queen Mary, the Mass, and
all Catholic rites and ceremonies remained
in the old church.
Protestants Seize the Church
It was in the reign of Elizabeth that
the priest and the Holy Sacrifice were
driven from its hallowed walls, to be
 Father Troy 
replaced by the English Book of Common
Prayer and the Protestant Creed
of thirty-nine articles. After 500 years
of Catholic worship centralised in the
Mass, came the first parson, William
Dermot. Then for the first time was
heard in this old church, the doubts
of the first unbelieving disciples of
Capharnaum, who, on hearing Christ
promise His own Flesh and Blood
as our Real Food, turned from him
and walked no more with him. Like
these first unbelievers, William Dermot
would not accept the Eucharistic gift
of Christ. And so, the bounteous
blessings of Christ ceased to be dispensed
from the ancient church by
the wattle bridge.
Times of Persecution
Not only was the priest driven from
the church; he was also forbidden to
say Mass for the people, under the
most severe penalties. The people were
commanded, under pain of heavy fine,
to attend the new services in the church
that had been taken from their beloved
priests. But the people were loyal to
the old faith, and absolutely refused to
conform, so that William Dermot was
left with an empty church. Dauntless
priests faced all dangers to offer the
Holy Sacrifice for their persecuted
people. Eluding the priest-hunter, they
offered up Mass now in one house in
the parish, now in another. The spies
of the Protestants, however, tracked
them from place to place, and sent
reports to their headquarters concerning
these places. So through a long and
trying period, the priest and people had
to carry on the practice of the Faith without
a church. Protestant records tell
us that the Mass was offered up in a
backroom of a Mr. Shelton's house.
The house of this Mr. Shelton was at
the corner of Hangman's Lane, beyond
the bridge. Mr. Shelton is
typical of the Catholics of the time, for
when on his election in 1604 as Mayor
of Dublin, he was asked to take the oath
of Supremacy, he refused, and was cast
into prison.
A report of 1630 from a Protestant
source, show how much Elizabeth had
failed in the work of proselytism.
 " The most part of the parishioners are
recusants who go to one Browne to
hear Mass."  From this Protestant
report, it is clear that the people were
true to the ancient Faith. Nor were
they afraid to openly declare their faith
when necessary. In 1612, when Bishop
O'Devaney, and Father Lonergan were
dragged through the parish to be
hanged on Arbour Hill, the people
poured forth to show by their presence
their sympathy with the saintly Bishop
and priest who were going to
martyrdom.
Persecution Intensified Under the
Puritans
In 1647, the puritans got possession
of Dublin city. Immediately, they
issued an edict banishing all the priests
and forbidding Catholics to spend a
night within the city walls. Ten years
of this intensified persecution had its
effect, only one priest in the city was
able to elude the priest-hunter,
Father Patrick Relly. Persecution,
war, and pestilence, almost annihilated
the Catholic population ; twenty
years of the Puritan Inquisition left
altogether in the city only 8,780 souls,
and in the parish of St. Michan's only
1,173 residents, more than half of
them being English. With the Restoration
of the monarchy in 1660,
Catholic hopes revived. Then the first
Catholic Church erected since the
usurpation of the old St. Michan's was
opened. The church was built at the
corner of Mary's Lane ; it was this
edifice that was extended by Dr. Nary
in 1702. But peace was shattered.
The victory of William of Orange at
the Boyne brought renewed persecution.
Priests and Bishops were again
hunted down like wolves. The saintly
Archbishop of Dublin was one of
many persecuted for the faith. He
died imprisoned in a foul dungeon in
1692. The residence and chapel of the
Augustinians in Arran Quay were destroyed
; the Jesuits were driven from
their schools and chapel in Lucy Lane
(Chancery Place) ; and the Benedictine
Nuns were also banished from the
parish in those days of persecution.
Growth and Division of the Parish
Up to the year 1707, from the foundation
of the parish in 1095, only one
parish existed on the north bank of the
Liffey it included all north Dublin.
Towards the end of the seventeenth
century, the city grew very rapidly.
The increase in population was so
marked in St. Michan's parish that the
Archbishop decided to divide it into
three parts ; the west was dedicated
to St. Paul, the east to St. Mary, and
the centre portion was marked off as
St. Michan's. Five years before the
parish was thus divided, the then parish
priest, Dr. Nary, had built considerable
extensions to the church in Mary's
Lane. The Church was now rapidly
growing, and gaining strength in the
city.
A special Lord's Committee reported
in 1730 : " There are three public
Mass Houses in the said parish, one in
Mary's Lane, another in Arran Key
both built, as we are informed, before
the first of George I (1714), another
in Church Street, fitted up into a Mass
House since the first of George I . "
The energetic parish priest, Dr. Nary,
not content with extending his church,
had as many as twelve schools built.
He also had courses of lectures in
Catholic doctrine, to which Protestants
could come. Many conversions resulted.
The Jesuits and Mary's Lane Chapel
A manuscript in the British Museum
which describes the interior of this
chapel informs us that a picture of St.
Francis Xavier was hung at one ot
the side altars near the pulpit. It was
a souvenir of the services rendered by
the Jesuits. In spite of persecution
and a decree of suppression in 1773, the
Jesuits continued their work in the parish
Church Building Movement. Anne
Street Church Built 1816
The early nineteenth century saw a
big church building movement initiated
all through the city. Dean Wall
who directed the destinies of the parish
from 1804 to 1826 was foremost
amongst the church builders. He decided
to build a modern up-to-date
church to replace the old edifice in
Mary's Lane. The new church in
North Anne Street was opened in 1816.
Mary's Lane chapel was then utilised
as a school for many years.
The Presbytery
The old presbytery was built up
against the back of Anne Street church,
and faced towards Halston Street.
Archdeacon McMahon shortly after
his appointment to the parish in 1862
set to work to build a new presbytery,
the present beautiful edifice beside the
church. This he gave to his curates,
but he continued to occupy the old
presbytery himself.
As there was a very large increase in
the Catholic population of the parish on
its north side, Canon McMahon built a
wooden chapel at Berklev Road, in 1870.
When the Canon died in 1890, the
parish of St. Michan's was again divided.
The New Front to St. Michan's
Church
Up to the year 1891, St. Michan's
church had its front only on Anne
Street. The old presbytery was built
up against the back of the church in
Halston Street. Canon Conlan recognising
the necessity for increased
church space, demolished the old presbytery
at the back of the church, and
pushed the outer wall of the church out
to Halston Street, thus gaining thirty
additional feet in the length of the
church. He gave the church a most
artistic finish in the crenellated tower,
turrets and gables which formed a new
frontage on Halston Street.
To-day there are more Catholics in
the parish of St. Michan than there
were in Dublin in 1659. To-day the
faith of the people is as strong as that
of the Danes who founded St. Michan's
about 1,000 years ago. We have not
the old church, but we have the old Faith.