I had an American cousin who, during a trip to
Glendalough on which I accompanied him, expressed disappointment
with the size of the Seven Churches. He observed that
these could easily be fitted into the Petit Trianon, and yet leave
space for several more such churches in the remaining rooms.
Perhaps in an excess of uncharity I condemned his views, and
sought in my own mind for an adequate description of "sights" which, to my
thinking, would be of some value to prospective tourists to Ireland. Some musings
and meanderings actually of my own experience I now venture to set forth.
If there is any man who is so unresponsive as not to be thrilled by the glorious
and hallowed valley of Glendalough he must be, indeed, a clod. The churches are
small and primitive, but what a wealth of labour and piety must have inspired their
erection and maintenance. Away back in the sixth century they were built, and
they come to us down the ages as reminders of a simpler yet more glorious age
when virtue was esteemed above all things, and life was quiet enough to permit
reflection. The splendours of Versailles are great, and I have heard of a wonderful
palace called Tzarkoe Seloe in Russia, but at Glendalough I am reminded of the
old song :—
 He is mad who would wrestle with the lofty tree
While by his side is a little tree, yielding to his hand.
Oh, the rowan tree is high, yet its fruit is bitter,
But blackberries and raspberries grow on trees of lowliest bloom.

And then there is Killarney. One hears of Killarney, and half suspects that
its beauty is the invention of clever advertisers, but it is not. I came into Killarney
from Kenmare, and, standing on the road overlooking the panorama of lakes and
mountains I just gasped at so much beauty. You see the lakes shimmering like
"old silver," to quote Kelleher; mountains rising tier upon tier ever receding and
displaying a never-ending variety of green. Mist seems always to hang on these
mountains, changing the aspect of the countryside incessantly. It is all too
wonderful for words. For sheer natural beauty I cannot conceive anything to
equal Killarney. When I was there I, of course, visited Muckross Abbey. In
any other setting Muckross Abbey would stand out in its true significance as
one of the most interesting remains in the country. Killarney seems to dwarf it.
It is a Franciscan foundation, dating from 1340, and the remains comprise a nave,
choir, and transept, the whole being about 100 feet long. The cloisters are
the best preserved part of the building, and it is here that one finds oneself
lamenting, as in Glendalough, the days of quiet and reflection that have passed
from the world, as it seems, for ever.
I left Killarney convinced that my country couldn't possibly have anything
further to show me, and even my detour from Limerick Junction to Cashel did not
fill me with anticipation. I was agreeably surprised. The Rock of Cashel is a
wonderful sight, and as I went to the trouble of reading up its history I derived
tremendous pleasure from contemplation of its colourful past. The Rock rises up
precipitously 300 feet, and before King Brian's time Cashel was of importance
as a fort, and ever since it has been of importance in the history of Munster. The
O'Briens met Henry II of England there, Edward Bruce held Parliament on the
Rock, and in 1647, the Cromwellians pillaged the cathedral. One naturally singles
out Cormac's chapel as the chief building on the Rock. It is, I understand,
unique amongst the buildings of Ireland, in as much as it carries the high stone
roof so characteristic of early Irish architecture, and it is decorated in the richest
Norman style. Cormac's chapel must have great interest for the antiquarian,
but even for one of the uninitiated, the place induces a feeling pride of race—
that is if you are Irish—which is unequalled anywhere else that I have since been.
Even Tara where one would expect to be almost overwhelmed with race-consciousness
loses in comparison with "Cashel of the Kings." Somehow one feels that
Cashel should have been the capital of Gaelic Ireland.
From Cashel I intended to cut back home to Dublin through Clare, Connemara,
and the Midlands, but the fates decided differently, and my journey ended
by being forced to return after six days instead of an intended trip of fourteen days.
In case anyone should like to undertake the trip, I might remark that the total cost
of my holidays which included rather heavy railway expenses, was £7 . Had I
gone on for fourteen days my tour, probably, would have averaged about £ 1 per day.
 General view of Glendalough  