Some weeks ago I visited the wild coast of Sheephaven Bay in the north of Tyrconnell, and in the most picturesque part of that glorious sheet of water I found the Franciscans established. They have come back to Donegal after an absence of three hundred years; and though they are commonly called Capuchins they are, nevertheless, Friars Minor, and sons of St. Francis, and the land of the O'Donnells recognizes in them the brethren of the Four Masters and of the friars who had at one time half-a-dozen houses in Tyrconnell.
They have established themselves in Ards House, the seat of a great family of "Planters" who, in the beginning of the seventeenth century, took possession of the confiscated land of an ancient Irish clan, the clan of MacSwiney Doe; and only a few miles from Ards House stands the ruined castle of Doe, celebrated not only for being the seat of the "MacSwiney of the battleaxes," but also because it was the place where Owen Roe O'Neill landed in Ireland in 1642. The confiscated territory of the MacSwiney Doe was at first made over by James I of England to a Scottish soldier of fortune called William Stewart who was born in Wigtownshire to a property which brought him so little revenue that he had to support himself, during the reign of Elizabeth, by fighting as a mercenary in the armies of the Swedes and the Danes. He never fought against " the Arch-Traitor Tirowen," as the Elizabethans were fond of calling Hugh O'Neill, and was absent from Ireland when the confiscation of Ulster
 Capt francis McCullach 
was decreed ; but being a Stewart and a hungry Scotchman and, therefore, persona grata with King James, who was always ready to reward fellow countrymen with property that did not belong to him, and being, moreover, " of good report" at the court of Whitehall " as an agent”, in other words as one who acted as an intelligence officer on the Continent, he was specially recommended by the King at the eleventh hour as one who should get a chunk of Irish land. Though William Stewart came in late, he soon made up for the lost time by a display of rapacity which extended his domains as far south as Newtownstewart in Tyrone, a town which he made his headquarters, and which is still named after him.
First of all, he built a house for himself at Ards near the old castle of the MacSwiney Doe, and surrounded it by such a strong wall that he earned the special commendation of the English Government agent who was sent into Ulster some time later to see if the Planters had fulfilled the conditions whereon the land was given to them, the principal conditions being that they should live on the confiscated land, build on it houses strong enough to serve as forts, and sub-let it to English and Scottish "settlers," who should be ready to undertake military service against the mere Irish." 
Of all the Planters, William Stewart was the hardest and the most inflexible, with the result that, as I have just stated, he got so much more land from the Crown that he became in course of time a great territorial magnate and a Baronet. The one mistake he made was in living too long. Had he died in 1640, he would have ended a life of unchequered success; but, unfortunately for himself, he lived until the great rebellion of 1641 broke out, and until he saw all his houses and castles going up in smoke.
There remains a curious account of those days written by a grandson of Sir William called William Montgomery, who passed a few years of his boyhood in Newtownstewart. This young William depicts for us a scene which would be satisfactory enough from an English point of view, but which would hardly be regarded as pleasing by the exiled MacSwineys. Sir William was then old, but he remained as stern a disciplinarian as ever, and always assisted at the military exercises of his Protestant tenantry, who were officered, apparently, by his numerous sons and grandsons.
Young Will, one of those grandsons, was present at a review of this kind which took place on the 23rd October, 1641, in the spacious gardens of Newtownstewart House under the stern eye of the gray-headed old baronet. Willy was only a boy, but  "I had a pike and muskett made to my size," he writes, "and was made to drill with the others." 
On the day in question he was:
 "Performing the postures of my Arms (in) my grandfather's, Sir William Stewart's foot company, himself viewing his soldiers and their arms, and exercising them; when, about four hours afternoon, to our amazement, a man halfstript came with a letter signifying the Insurrections, Murthers, and burnings on all sides, committed by the Irish. The messengers, one after another, came sweating and out of breath from divers quarters with like consternation and haste as Job's escaped servants did to tell him of his losses; and they related the cruell Massacres of divers Persons.... Sir William leaving a guard in his said house, went next morning with his Lady and Family to Strabane and thence to Londonderry, ten miles further." 
Sir William escaped just in time, for both Newtownstewart and Strabane were afterwards captured by Sir Phelim O'Neill, and as Owen Roe landed in the following year at Doe Castle, with two hundred Irish officers who had seen service on the Continent and with "a good supply of arms and ammunition for the Irish," we must conclude that Sir William's original house at Ards had been taken long before by the insurgent MacSwineys.
I need not direct the attention of the Irish reader to the unconscious humour in the letter of young Willy Montgomery which I have quoted above. "Wully" talks of the "Insurrections, Murthers, and burnings on all sides, committed by the Irish." But he does not say anything of the wholesale massacres committed previously by the English, of their slaughter of women and children, and of the famines which they systematically and scientifically provoked by the wasting of the country, and the destruction of all crops and cattle. It does not strike him that his grandfather Sir William was a hoary murderer and robber who had no more rights in Tyrone or Tyrconnell than a Barbary Pirate.
Sir William's line became extinct; but another Stewart came into possession of Ards House. Surely, Sir William must have turned in his grave when he heard that the Franciscans had bought the house where he had first established himself in Ireland! It was not, of course, the same house or, rather, it was more than the same house, for the original fortalice must have been a very rude residence, walled and loop-holed, whereas the present house is a great Georgian mansion with about a hundred rooms. One can distinctly trace several additions, the latest additions being all in a light eighteenth-century style with spacious rooms lighted by large windows, and with that absence of protective features which we find in French country houses built just before the Revolution, that is at a time when the French nobleman felt perfectly sure that his serfs would never rebel.
The decorations are apparently by Adam, who distinguished himself by the ornamentation of several great Dublin houses. The ball-room will be converted into a chapel, and the nursery will be filled with young novices, for this is to be the novitiate of the Capuchins in Ireland.
The most charming room in the house is the library, which is a perfect eighteenth-century gem,  panelled in oak, with walnut shelves and cabinets and great mahogany table, and in the ceiling overhead a mild electric light, for the friars have installed electricity. There are at present no books in this library ; but I can well understand how desirable a place it must have been at the close of the eighteenth century when its shelves were filled with editions of the classics, and with well-bound copies of Gray, Fielding, Johnson, Milton, Shakespeare and Richardson. In future it will probably contain theological and devotional works in Latin, English, French and Irish ; and I cannot imagine a better place than this library for a Franciscan chronicler who takes up the pen laid down by O'Cleary and Colgan. I can imagine such a chronicler sitting there in the daytime with the magnificent view over Sheephaven to inspire him, with the white glistening sands of Duini on the other side of the lough, and, beyond them, the bold headlands of Rosguill Peninsula, with the ruins of Doe Castle actually in sight, and with Kilmacrenan Abbey only an hour distant. But perhaps he will write best of all on a stormy night when the wind is thundering down the bay and the calm of the library is in striking contrast to the agitation of nature. 
It is not, however, for scribes that the Capuchins have bought this house ; it is for missionaries, and in this they are only continuing the traditions of their predecessors, the Irish monks who furnished so many saints and martyrs to Great Britain, Gaul and Germany. The new missionaries will go further afield, however; they will preach in lands that even St. Brendan never heard of.
Here in Ard Mhuire the novices will spend one year of quiet preparation and healthful recreation, and they will roam through a particularly fine forest that grows down to the water's edge, and that boasts not only of oaks, elms, ash-trees, and beeches, but also of Austrian pines, Irish yews, purple beeches, cedars, and one cork-tree! As a novitiate this beautiful and lonely place is ideal. Previously the Capuchin novitiate was at Kilkenny, a fine place also, but one which, being situated in a thickly-inhabited district, did not give the novices much room for roaming. In Ard Mhuire, however, they can wander and pray in their forest as their holy founder wandered and prayed, and saw visions in Alverno of the Apennines. Some of them may even see visions there like that stupendous vision vouchsafed to Francis when he received the stigmata. 
This may seem far-fetched; but is it far-fetched? The ivied ruins of half a dozen Franciscan monasteries in Tyrconnell answer "No!" The grey remains of ecclesiastical foundations which flourished in Tyrconnell even before the days of St. Francis return a still more emphatic "No." Lough Gartan on whose banks St. Columba was born; Kil-mac-nenain where he founded an abbey; Kildonal where one of the O'Donnells founded an abbey in the year 1600; Kilbaron on Donegal Bay where St. Colman built a church (which is now the Protestant church) ; Killybegs where MacSwiney Bannig built a Franciscan Friary; these and many other holy places make Tyrconnell holy; and the Capuchins recognize this by calling their new novitiate Ard Mhuire (Marymount), thus going back to the original name, which Sir William Stewart had discarded. The full address is :
" Capuchin Friary, 
Ard Mhuire, Cashelmore,
Letterkenny, Co. Donegal.

I hope that they will go further with the restoration of Irish names in this Gaelic-speaking district, which should get rid, as soon as possible, of names like the following: Fanny's Bay, Horn Head, Fort Stewart, Bloody Foreland, Downing’s Bay, Sheephaven Bay, White Horse Rock, Black Rock.
This riddance will be all the easier since the old names still exist. I was talking of miracles; but what greater miracle could you get than this return of the Franciscans? What would Sir William Stewart have said of this resurrection? What would Cromwell have said? Would he have quoted that Old Testament of which he was so fond? Would he have quoted from the vision of Ezechiel in the "plain that was full of bones"? or from that tremendous hymn in which the prophet foretells the resurrection of a nation :
 "Thus saith the Lord God: Come, spirit, from the four winds, and blow upon these slain, and let them live again.... And you shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have opened your sepulchres, and shall have brought you out of your graves, O my people, and shall have put My spirit in you, and you shall live, and I shall make you rest upon your own land,... saith the Lord Almighty." 
