 History of the Financial Administration of Ireland to
1817. By T. J. Kiernan, M.A., National University
of Ireland; Ph.D., London; Fellow of the Royal
Statistical Society. London: P. S. King and Son,
Limited. Pp. 300. 15 
It is a commonplace of government
that the power of a Parliament
is measured by its control
over the public purse. If the Executive
Government, whether King or Cabinet,
native or foreign, is financially independent,
if it can meet its expenses
in war and peace out of permanent
taxes, hereditary revenues or foreign
subventions, the meetings of Parliament
are likely to be rare, indeed, and popular
representation to have little direct influence
on national policy. Parliamentary
power, therefore, resides fundamentally
in the ability to grant or
withhold supplies of money ; but it is
not sufficient for a Parliament to be
able to refuse supplies if it has no voice
in the spending of money once it is
granted, i.e., in determining the uses
to which the revenues are appropriated.
And so, granted this control over
supplies, the material lines of parliamentary
development are towards obtaining,
first, the power of deciding the
objects of government ; and, secondly,
the right to ensure by examination of
accounts that, in fact, the revenues
granted have been expended on the
proper objects and without extravagance.
The methods of financial procedure
in the Irish Free State offer as good
an example as any other of a fully-developed
system of financial control.
Under the Constitution the Dáil has
legislative authority, exclusive of the
Seanad, in relation to Money Bills. The
Dáil decides by what taxes the revenues
are to be raised, and to what uses they
are to be appropriated. Furthermore,
through its officer, the Auditor-General,
and its Committee of Public Accounts,
it conducts a minute examination of
expenditure actually incurred, with a
view to ensuring that its wishes as to
appropriation have been carried out,
and that there has been no extravagance
or laxity of supervision. The Minister,
for instance, who in common with the
other members of the Executive Council
is responsible to the Dáil, is charged
with the control of the national finances,
including the detailed, day-to-day supervision
of expenditure by all Departments
of State. In all its main features
the Free State system reproduces what
in England is the fruit of many centuries
of development.
Nowadays, it is the fashion to depreciate
the importance in the national
life of the Parliament, which met an
untimely and inglorious end in 1801.
It is true enough that that Parliament
was far removed from, and indeed,
largely hostile to, the sufferings and
aspirations of that hidden Ireland
which, so far as the eighteenth century
is concerned, Mr. Daniel Corkery has
made to live again. But it is with
institutions as with individuals ; when
they die young, we must estimate the
worth of their lives not by their actual
achievements only, but also by what
they might reasonably have been expected
to achieve if they had lived to
maturity. Looked at in this way the
" last independent Parliament of
Ireland " was a body which it is as
dangerous to depreciate overmuch
as it was absurd to glorify in the manner
fashionable not so very many years ago.
In particular, no serious student of Irish
history can fail to be interested in the
struggles of that Parliament to obtain
financial control.
Poyning's Law, enacted at Drogheda
in the reign of Henry VII , left the Irish
Parliament little more than a body for
registering statutes conceived by the
" King's Lieutenant and Council " in
Ireland and approved by " the King
and his Council " in England.
Strangely enough, up to the second
quarter of the seventeenth century this
Act, in the view of the Irish Parliament,
was a safeguard against the despotic
use of personal power by a disloyal
Lord Lieutenant, rather than a restriction
of liberty. But Strafford had
scarcely entered on his Irish regime
when he saw other possibilities in that
ancient legislation, and from his time it
was definitely used as an instrument
for the domination of the Irish Parliament
by the English Government.
In those days the revenues of Ireland
were made up of certain annual rents
and duties on imported and exported
goods, the whole amounting to the
total, to our minds absurdly small, of
£35,000 a year. In the very meagreness
of this revenue lay the possibilities of
future growth of parliamentary power.
But the members of the Parliament
which sat in the years immediately
following the restoration of Charles II
were deeply concerned to secure to
themselves the possessions obtained as
a result of the forfeitures which followed
the Rebellion of 1641, so deeply that
when Parliament was dissolved it had
given away its fiscal control. It had
made the executive power independent
by providing for new perpetual taxes
which, added to the annual revenue
and to the rents retained by the King
in re-granting their estates to the Cromwellian
adventurers, increased the
Hereditary Revenue to £250,000 a
year. As a consequence the next
Parliament was not summoned until
1692, and then only because the increased
military expenses resulting from
the Jacobite war rendered the existing
revenues inadequate. The insufficiency
of the permanent supplies made the
Government again dependent on Parliament.
This state of affairs was a preparation
for some not inconsiderable progress
in control which took place in the
reign of Queen Anne, when, with mounting
expenditure, the permanent Hereditary
Revenues were becoming year by
year more inadequate, and the increasing
importance of the " additional duties "
granted by Parliament gave the Commons
a growing influence. The appropriation
of grants by Parliament was
still, however, practically unknown.
Instead, the Irish Parliament, anticipating
what is normally a later development,
set up in 1695 a Committee of
Public Accounts. " Ordinarily," says
Mr. Kiernan, " appropriation ought to
have come first ; but owing to the
comparative powerlessness of Parliament
in the matter of legislation, the
activities of the House of Commons
were turned towards audit, the main
object being to bring publicity to bear
upon the expenditure of Government."
It is true to say that the House of
Commons made remarkably good use
of the only effective instrument to its
hand. With incomplete and unedited
accounts, the Public Accounts Committee,
nevertheless, presented a series
of excellent reports showing the most
minute examination of all the available
material, and exercising a constant,
though far from adequate, check on
financial abuses. For one thing the
Committee conducted a long campaign
against the payment of pensions to
people who had never rendered service
to any section of the Irish nation, and
who were not even resident in Ireland.
To quote from Mr. Kiernan, " In many
respects we may regard the Irish House
of Commons as performing, or trying
in the face of difficulties to perform,
the duties now entrusted to the central
finance department of the Government."
About the middle of the eighteenth
century there was a battle royal as to
the need for the King's consent to the
appropriation of surplus revenues. The
Commons were defeated ; but immediately
commenced the practice,
which had obtained in the British
Parliament since 1692, of appropriating
their supplies to specific purposes.
The objects of the appropriation were
mainly (1) hospitals, charities and
schools, and (2) agriculture, commerce
and industry. Mr. Kiernan justly remarks
that without this appropriation
the legislative independence of the end
of the century would never have been
achieved.
Though Poyning's law was virtually
repealed in 1782 it was not until 1793
that the position was reached that the
expenditure of all public funds was at
the sole direction of the House of
Commons, and it was in 1795 that an
effective attempt was first made to vest
in the Treasury the ultimate responsibility
for the detailed supervision of
expenditure. What use the Irish Parliament
would eventually have made of
its new powers can only be guessed at.
The last years of its existence were also
years of war, with its attendant extravagance
of war finance.
It was not until 1817 that the Legislative
Union of 1801 was followed by
the Financial Union, engineered to the
maximum detriment of Ireland.
Altogether, the story is full of interest
and fascinating in its suggestion of
" what might have been." Mr. Kiernan's
telling of it suffers, in places, from
an overweight of quotations and extracts
which would have found a more appropriate
place in appendices The outline
of the narrative is somewhat blurred.
The book is, nevertheless, one to the
making of which have gone much thought
and careful research, and the result is a
valuable study of an important aspect
of Irish history.
