The editor of the Capuchin Annual once more offers me the hospitality of his columns. At the risk of proving wearisome to my readers, I venture to submit as a contribution to this issue some gleanings from the " Dusty Documents " I dealt with last year. I have selected some extracts from those old faded pages that afford us a little insight into the state of Ireland in the early days of the Capuchin Mission there, that show the difficulties our missionaries had to face, and that mark them out as men of zeal and sacrifice, whose names and deeds deserve to be recorded. To me the mere transcribing of these pages is full of interest and pleasure, and it may be that some who read them will confess with Goethe that
'Tis delightful to transfuse yourself 
Into the spirit of the ages past 
To see how wise men thought in olden times. 
My first extract is from a MS. entitled : Little Notes to Help My Memory in Matters occurring from Time to Time. This manuscript was written by Rev. Father Bernardine, a native of County Longford. His name in the world was Felix O'Farrell. He was received into the Capuchin Order in Charleville, France, on August 5, 1634. When Commissary-General of the Irish Capuchins he made in the year 1658 a visitation of the Irish Mission. The extract I now give is his own account of his journey to and from Ireland, taken from his Little Notes. I reproduce it in his own words adhering to the quaint expressions, faulty spelling and grammar as found in the manuscript. The original is preserved in the Archives de l' Aube, France, of which a copy is in the Archives of the Irish Capuchins, Church Street, Dublin. 
Father Bernardine’s journey " I beganne my journy for Ireland this same yeare (1658) in the beginning of June the 3 or 4th day thereof, arrived in Paris the 8th Vigilia Pentecostis, where I did my affaires with the Nonce of the Pope and the Marchand banquier a Sunday in the afternoone and a Monday, and departed Paris the 3d, feast of Pentecoste. Least to be onerous to the convents I did not enter into any from hence to Paris, and slept but in two from Paris to Calais, where I found the Duke of Cresquy goeing to England as an extraordinary Ambassador to complemente the Protector Oliver Cromwell, who complemented the King of France before haveing sent thither Fleetwood. I embarked with his traine on Corpus Christi day, and arrived the next morning (we departed early in the evening) at Dover, whence we went straight to London, Chester and Ireland, being never examined. Arriveing in Dublin I learned where FF. Anselme and Stephen lived, [note: Father Anselm (Ball), a native of Fingal. Received July 2, 1637. Came on the Mission in 1646, and laboured chiefly around Sutton, County Dublin. Father Stephen (Hussey), a native of Galtrim. Received August 5, 1634. Came on mission in 1652, and laboured chiefly around Swords, County Dublin.] went to see them, brought them to Dublin, where we were some 5 Capuchins together, and conferred of our affaires. I left F. Stephen (whom I found sickely) in Dublin to consulte the doctors of medicin and had him take physick according their direction. Thence I poursued my journy to see the rest of our FF. and BB. I passed through the County of Longford, being my surest way, saw my 2 sisters with whom I stayed onely one night, for my poore friends and people of acquaintance came about me for to congratulate me after 29 yeares absence, but most imprudently, for the rumor was spread soe universally that the heretics knew of my being in the countrie, and some of them being friends unto my brother in law and sister gave me warning to depart suddenly or that I would be arrested. · · "I parted in night time, in most raynie weather, passed through a deserted place where I had grass rushes, etc., over my knees, ledd onely by my sister, untill we came unto a little cottache where we found poore men and a little fyre who did not drye me. I layed in my wet cloathes on rushes all water under, the rayne falling still downe from the house who was not covered but lightly. The next morning being a Sunday I said Mass in that place where I thought none knew of my being but my sister. Yett the people cherched every little villadge round about me, and at length found me out and being not able to hear mass in such a little house they uncovered the house to heare mass. After which I went through boggs woods wildernesses being ledd per in via et inaquosa untill I came from Abby Dirig (where my sisters dwelled) unto Callow thinking to pass the river Seanainn at Bealathliag. [note: These two places are in County Longford. Abbeyderg (Red Abbey) in the present parish of Carrickedmond. Ballyleague (Mouth of ford of stony place). Place names of County Longford.-MacGivney).] Being within two miles unto this place I must have turned back and be a whole long summer's day going from moore to moore from wood to wood, by reason that the bruite of my arrival was also in Bealathliag where there was a garrison of English heretics. At length I came unto a place where the river was viadable and where I was in the water soe deepe that without manifest danger of drowning I could not be further downe or deeper in the river. "Thence I went to Achrim where I saw and conferred with R .F. Barnabie Barnewall whom I confirmed Vice-Commissarie in all the places wheresoever he t [note: Father Barnaby (Barnewall), a native of Crickstown, County Meath. Received in 1607. Came on Mission in 1625, of which he was Vice-Commissary and afterwards Commissary-General.] would find himself. Thence I passed through the rest of Connaught going by Sliabachtin to Tobar rig an Domnaig, thence unto the County of Clare, Six-milbridge, where I thought to meet with F . Antonie, but he went the other way down to Connaght, and soe I missed him. Thence by Limbrick I came to Clonmell and Dungarvan, neare which I mett with R.F. Gregorie [note: Father Gregory (Conroy) a native of Dungarvan. Received on December 14, 1625. Came on Mission in 1632, and laboured chiefly around Youghal and Dungarvan.] in Hacquet'stowne, where I reconfirmed him in the chardge of vicecommissarie where R .F . Barnabie should not be, etc. I was to go thence to see F . Michael [note: Father Michael (Collins), a native of Cork. Received in 1620. Came on Mission in 1634. Was Superior of the Cork house in 1642, when, on April 30, he was sent as a deputy from the Irish War Council to the King of France and to Cardinal Richelieu to seek aid for Irish troops.]  unto ye County of Kierry, but was dissuaded by R .F. Gregory on manie solide reasons. Thence I came backe to Dublin the shortest way. Here I heard of F. Stephen's sicknesse redoubled and become a yellow Jandise occasioned by his over much labor, watching and badd bedding, for since his being in the mission, he never laid on a bedd untill my arrival there, but onely on straw: his bedd was underground lieke a grave whereunto he could goe onely creeping on his belly, and wherein all that he could doe was to turne himself: this little houle and the adioining little cottadge made onely of twig gs and straw was soe privatly done and soe well compassed that such as came in unto the house could hardly gett out ye entrie unto his caverne. The R .F . Barnabie was not much better lodged being still in a cave, whence in a whole yeare and a halfe he never went unto the gate of the house to take the ayre, but onely one day that the Countess of Fingall (with whom he lodged) had advise that her house would be chearsed for to gett him out. Then he went unto some neighbouring boggs to hidd himself untill night. 
"After stayeing with F. Stephen 17 days untill he was a little better, I came to sea the 18th day after and came from ye barr of Dublin unto the barr of Chester the same day. I established my correspondencie in London with F. Francis Joseph, came back to Calais and Charleville having putt but 24 days from Dublin to Charleville and three months and a halfe onely coming and goeing to Ireland, for haveing parted hence in the beginning of June, I was back a little after midd-September following. I was not questioned in all my wayes of my state and qualitie but in Castle Couna 4 miles from Clonmell, and an other time in Dublin, where I was lieke to be taken exhorteing a coussen of myne to be constant in her belief her Mris having much importunated her to goe Church and [word illegible in MS.] herself. She promised me to be still constant. In this way I gave absolution "ab haeresi" unto a young man in the Grange of Baldonille in the parish of Houth and brought with me F. Anselme's relation de fructu missionis. After my arrival I gave notice unto RF. General of my return." 

A Capuchin in Prison
Father Francis Joseph, with whom Father Bernardine " established his correspondencie in London" was an Irish Capuchin named Browne, a native of Galway, who had been received in 1640. He came to Ireland in 1646. In Father Bernardine's " Little Notes " there is an account of Father Joseph's arrest and imprisonment in Dublin, supplied by himself at Father Bernardine's request, as follows :" Having goen several times to comfort a good prieste of the Wardes, prisoner at Newgate in Dublin, I broght the communion to himselfe and some of his fellows, by wich meanes, being made knowen to two of the Birns alias Brins of the Countie of Wickloe (that partaked of the blessed Sacrament out of Wardes hands), I was betrayed by them, soe that I was apprehended by the gaoler coming out of the sayd Prison about the fift of June, 1657. After my examination, being remanded back, I was kept in the gaoler's house with great inconveniencies in a narrow roome togeather with many criminal persones comeing in and out day and night, without permission to confer with F. Warde, who was kept over the gate. Yett, I could not obtaine the benefit of the law upon a " habeas corpus " whereby I should be removed to the prison of the 4 Courtes, for feare forsoe the that I might find occasion to say masse, hear confession or the lieke, or that I might converse with Father Quin. "On the Sollemnitie of the Lord Protector (as on Herode's feaste) our names were taken and order granted for our transportation unto the Island of Boffin for a perpetual imprisonement without any meanes to recall our doome by freinds or monie, as several endeavoured to doe for F. Quin and me. However when all hopes were lost, I being in the Sheriff's hands to be conveyed away, God recompensed a little charitie I did to Mr. Charles White, F . Edward's brother (whom I procured to be released out of prison in London, when his owne protestant kindred would not succour him) for that my Lord Viscount Ranelagh his cosen german, being pressed by my Lady White, his aunte, and her daughters and by some freinds of my interests (one was his Counsellor at law and the other his attorney) he wrote soe dilligently that, after many repulse, an order was conceaved that I and the 3 other priests that were prisoners at Dublin should be released upon condition to departe within 3 monthes and never to returne to the Irish nation, etc. Whereuppon I was dismissed about the last of July, 1657." 
Brother Edward’s journey
As a supplement to this interesting account written by Father Bernardine, I give here, extracts from a letter by Brother Edward, written in 1656, two years before Father Bernardine's visit. This Brother Edward had been sent from France to Ireland to bring to the Capuchins labouring there, assistance from the Sacred Congregation of Propaganda Fide. I have not been able to discover the original letter of Brother Edward, but have before me a Latin translation. Whilst it lacks the quaintness that characterises the letter of Father Bernardine, the fact that it largely deals with the same persons and localities, justifies its insertion here. " After coming from England to Cork [he arrived there on December 10, 1655] I at once went in the direction of Kinsale; I was led to do this because I expected that I would there come across Father Michael whom I thought was in the locality. I found however that I had to go somewhat further on to the district of Lord de Courcy. Here after a journey of fully fifteen leagues I met him, and remained with him for three or four days. " Nothing could be more delightful than to witness the wonderful devotion of the inhabitants of that place. They follow Father Michael from place to place so that they may be able to approach the sacraments; consequently wherever he happens to be celebrating has all the appearance of some great feast. He celebrates 
From dust remote ! Our photo shows Father Angelus (nearer the camera) and Father Michael making the ascent of Croagh Patrick 
Mass but only in some hidden secret place, because if he did so in any house he might be arrested and the owner of the house and all those present punished. He usually celebrates twice each day, and for greater safety, always very early in the morning before day-break, and even at this early hour the people are present. He also administers the sacraments of Penance and Holy Communion. " He has at all times to undergo very much hardship and suffering, and he himself told me that at times he has only water with which to slake his thirst. Still he enjoys good health and looks sleek and comely even like another Daniel. 
"Leaving Father Michael I came back to Cork, and then went on towards Youghal. About two miles further on, after great difficulty I came to the residence of Mr. Thomas Walsh at Piltown and found Father Gregory living in a cave so narrow and small, that a person could not stand erect in it. When I first saw him, I was so touched with pity, that I could not restrain my tears. It was early in the morning and he was lying stretched on his poor couch, resting after his missionary labours, he having already celebrated two Masses in the neighbourhood. "I remained with him for two days, during which time I was deeply impressed with the wonderful piety of the people, who flock to him in crowds for the Sacraments ; he never remains longer than two days in the same place, but travels around a district of full twenty miles in circumference, that forms his sphere of missionary activity. In every way he behaves as a truly apostolic man, and for this reason is more highly esteemed by all than I could possibly express to you. "From this place I journeyed to Limerick, where about six miles from that city, I found Father Anthony,[note: Father Anthony (Nugent), a native of Meath. Received on April 21, 1626. Came on Mission in 1635. Laboured in Dublin, Trim, Galway, New Ross and Waterford.]  in charge of an area about thirty leagues in circumference. He is engaged on missionary work every day, and has erected a number of little cabins in different localities. He occupies these hermit-like cells, for if he stayed in any house he would expose the owner to the danger of being punished. I remained with him for some time in one of those little huts. Like the other missionaries he, too, is held in highest estimation by the people. 
"I was not able to see Father Bernard [note: Father Bernard (Magrath), received on July 14, 1641. Came on Mission in 1653. Laboured around Limerick and Galway.] as he had gone to Ulster just a month before my arrival; but I left his portion of the alms in the care of Thomas Comyns to hold until his return. The first use that Father Antony made of what I had given to him was to give five pistoles that had been paid for his release from prison last year. · " Leaving there I proceeded to Dublin enduring many hardships by the way. When I had rested there for two days, I went to Killeen to meet Father Barnaby who was overjoyed to see me. He mentioned to me in the presence of his nephew, Lord Barnewall, that for three years he had not received the slightest word from Charleville. I could not possibly tell you, how zealously he labours for the welfare of the people. " Afterwards I went to Father Stephen who resides in the parish of Swords. Here he attends to twenty small villages discharging most of his duties in the night time. One would imagine from the large number who receive Holy Communion at each of his Masses, that there was some special Festival with a plenary Indulgence being celebrated. He preaches at every Mass. The day I was with him he had preached in Irish just after midnight. He suffers very much from a serious infirmity, but this does not make him neglect any of his sacred duties. 
" I also went to Sutton where Father Anselm labours zealously looking after nine or ten villages. "I sailed from Dublin on the first Sunday of Lent and arrived in Nantes on French soil the following Saturday." 
A Dublin incident
Among the most interesting of the " Dusty Documents " dealing with the early Irish Capuchins, pride of place must be given to " The Histoire of the Irish Capuchins," written at Charleville by Father Nicholas Archbold [note: Father Nicholas (Archbold), a native of Mountainfoot, County Dublin. Received November 11, 1611. Came on Mission in 1625. In addition to" The Histoire " from which we have been quoting, Father Nicholas has left other mauscripts. One is entitled "The Evangelical Fruct of the Seraphicall Franciscan Order." This, he tells us, was written in 1628, in the house of Alderman John Carbery in Bridge Street. The two companions of Father Nicholas in the scene described in the text, were Father Felix Conroy, received October 14, 1628; and Brother Simon Lawless, received in 1624.] in 1643. This work has been described as a prose poem, and deserves to rank close to the Fioretti as a picture of Franciscan life. The following extract from this " histoire " describes an incident that took place in our convent in Bridge Street, Dublin, in 1642, an incident in which the author, Father Nicholas, was one of the persons concerned. " The year one thousand six hundred forty one, all Christendom being upp in warrs; Irland likewise began to stirre; and by a large insurrection, to indevor to cast of the yoke of the tyrannical government of the Protestant English. The Puritant Parliamenters in Ingland held then against the King; usurping under themselves ye Citty of London, with a great part of the Kingdom helping them; under colour of religion and best government. These sends over into Irland niew supplies of soildiors under the conduit of Sr Simon Harcourt ; a rank Puritant and deadly enemy to the Catholiks. They landed at Dublin on Niew Yeers day 1642 and others more afterwards. "At Dublin the Religious and Priests enjoyed peaceably the publik use of their chappells, until the landing of the forsaid Puritant crew; who not forbering or abiding the very mention of mass, proceeded so farre little by little, persecuting the Clergie men; that at last entring violently into the Chappells without any order from the State, they laid hands on all they could find; subverted the altars, tore, broke, trampled under foot and burnt the sacred picturs; and turned ye Chappells to Courts of Guard; so that we said Mass then upp and down, in the Cittizens' houses; but were not long so; for the soldiers hadd an eye to such houses, and rushing in, laid now and then hands upon the Priest and ledd him to prison. 
" We hadd our Residence in the Bridgstreete. Fa Commissarie and the rest of the family retired themselves unto the Countrie uppon good reasons. Only remained in Town the Superior of the place, Fa Nicholas, Fa Felix and Br. Symon. Our Residence was a secular man's house and mansion. Wee hadd the forpart of it which stood on the street. Mass we could not say in it, but very privately and rarely, by meanes of the soyldiors sest and lodg'd round about us, even 7 or 8 in the same house. 
"Fa Felix was twice taken after having said mass abrod in the same street; and laid in prison with loss of silver Chalice, cloke, boots, etc., but within a 2 or three days released and sett in liberty, by Sir Charles Coot Governor of the city, with whom he hadd much acquaintance before the warrs. This Sir Charles was the first yt sett fire in Gentlemens houses beginning first with the King of Kliuntarff's house, even then whiles Agents sent from Dublin were dealing with the Discontented Country Gentlemen for a reconciliation. He was afterwards kild at Trim by the Irish. Fa Felix got means to escape out of the Citty and gave himself into the country. " One certain night about midnight there came about a half a dozen unruly Protestants armed, and would have broken the doore; but that they were lett in by the good-man of the house; they made up directly to our Quarter and struck strongly. Br. Simon being in his habit getts up out of his bedd and opens the doore to them; at his sight they were astonished and began to fume out. What divel have wee here? One said shall I run him through ? the other shall I shoot him? The one hadd his sword naked the other a musket, and doubtless they had don mischeff but that the Goodman of the house being Constable and another audacious man by him dissuaded them from violence. " One taketh Br Simon by the cord, his girdle and pulled him downe the staires to the great doore to deliver him up to the Court of Guard that watched at the Bridg gate, and said that he carried about him his cord to hang him. But being reprived by the Constable who entered in bonds for him they spar'd to do any other hurt, only they snacht away som cloaks and hatts and som such other things. 
" During the noise beneath, Fa Nicolas who lay in a higher roome, esteeming that doubtless they would mount upp draweth on his cloths in hast, goeth out the window of his chamber and from the leads of a house adioning lepeth down into a backsid paved with stone; the night was extreme dark it being in dead of winter and not as much as a starre appeering; a man could not see his own hand from him. The height of the leap was terrible to any man that beheld it. As God would the leaper receaved no hurt but a little rasing in one of his thighs by a table frame that lay under on the ground. This he attempted not dreaming that the place was half so high as it was, and he brooked not by any meanes to be putt in prison bycause that in that plight he could do no good to the distressed Catholiks. 
"Yet Br Simon being afterwards taken in our house at home by one Captain Hipsly and ledd away, Fa Nicolas occurring unto them voluntarily in the street ioyn'd himself compagnion and were both ledd and laid in prison, yet favorably dismist by the Captain but with promess that they should appeere whensoever he sent for them, wherein they failed not an houre. 
" Finally being delivered into the L. Lambert's hands then gouvernor of the city, they were after a weeks imprisonment by order of the Protestant State embarked for France with other priests and religious to the number of twentie. Br. Simon was the first whose name was written downe and recited in the role. Wee were equally divided into two barks. 
"Wee depart the Bay or Dublin on Pentecost Sunday morning and arrive at S. Martins in the Island of Rhe the next Satturday which was Trinitie eve. The banishing of the priests Pentecost eve wanteth not mysterie. It hath been always the custom of the Protestants to raise their persecutions then when the Catholicks generally do give themselves most to devotion and reconciliation of their consciences to God as at Christmas and Ester, and now at this tyme at the sacred solemnity of Pentecost an whose eve they clens' d the cittie of preests. This their custom I have peculiarly noted during my missional tyme in Irland wch was the space of neere sixteen years. 
"When wee were taking bote at the Key in Dublin and intrencht about with companies of armed soyldiors from the Marshallsie through the town a number of as well Catholicks as Protestants followed and filed the street and botes that stood at anker. The Protestants racaills boubing out those words, ' O'hone the Pope is dead the Mas is gone ': but the truth I hope shall prove contrary with an Alleluia singing the Pope is alive, Mas is com home." 
“The dart of death” 
To bring these extracts to an end, I finish with the account of the death of Father Edward Bath, the first Superior of the Convent in Bridge Street above referred to. It is taken from Archbold's " Histoire." " Fa Edward being returned to Dublin; it fell out that one evning goeing over the bridg of Dublin to see a sick pson; the cold wind that past over the bridg was so penetrat, bitter and vehement; it being winter tyme, and Fa Edward being of body sear' d and thin flesht; that as he told unto myself, the dart, as it were of death, pearct his very hart; and never after was he his owne man; but declining daily; untill that Nature, not being able to perform her accustomed obsequies brought him unto his exequies." Father Edward died on December 24th, 1634, and is buried in St. James' Graveyard, James' Street, Dublin. He was a native of Drumcondra: received in 1607 : come on Mission in 1618. 
In this contribution to THE CAPUCHIN ANNUAL, I have been only a " binder up of other reaper's sheaves," and can end with Montaigne: "I have made a nosegay of culled flowers and have brought nothing of my own but the string that ties them." 

