The Capuchins of Cork celebrate in 1932 an event of considerable interest in their history-the Centenary of the church of the Most Holy Trinity. This graceful temple owes its origin to Father Theobald Mathew, and the foundation stone was laid on the birthday of the Apostle of Temperance, October 10, 1832. Daniel Owen Madden, who was acquainted with Father Mathew, in Ireland and Its Rulers, published in 1845, in referring to this event remarked : " It is an interesting fact that the only religious procession ever seen for an immense period in Cork was at the laying of the foundation stone of this edifice, a ceremony that was performed with great pomp, in which the City Members and other leading persons took a leading part." According to the records of the Cork community " the plan of the Church was given by Mr. Payne, and the contracting architect was Mr. Anthony. The foundation was very expensive. Steam engines were employed to pump the water day and night. It is formed of inverted arches, pilings, etc., and cost nearly £ 1,600 before any portion of the church was commenced. Mr. Anthony failed and could not complete the contract, and afterwards Sir Thomas Deane & Co. undertook the completion, but only went as far as the roof of the church. The priests connected with the Capuchin Order in Cork at the commencement of the building were the Rev. Mr. O'Riordan, Rev. Mr. Power the Rev. D. F. McLeod, and Father Mathew." 
The First Capuchin Church
The little church in Blackmoor Lane, in which the Capuchins laboured when Father Mathew came to Cork in 1814, was, as Madden states, " situated in a very poor and neglected neighbourhood, where poverty and wretchedness abound." [note: Ireland and Its Rulers. Part i, cap. xxi.] Yet, this district is very dear to the Irish Capuchins, inasmuch as it is associated with the memory of two distinguished friars, Father Arthur O'Leary and Father Theobald Mathew, and also because of the association of the Capuchins with it in very trying times. Indeed, it is not unlikely that it was in this very spot that Father Robert Comyn and Father Michael O'Cuileain when they came to Cork in 1632 acquired a house which they converted into a chapel, and the remaining rooms into cells for themselves and their brethren. [note: Historia Missionis Hiberniae Capucinorum. By Father Robert O'Connell, O.M.Cap., f. 457] At that time a future member of the Order, Father Robert O'Connell, was a student of Philosophy in Cork where he resided from 1637 until 1640. He often frequented the little Capuchin church, and in the History of the Irish Capuchins, which he wrote after his ordination, he has recorded his impressions : " I saw that little church. It was the real expression of seraphic poverty and religious piety. I was witness of the austere life of the Capuchins, their contempt of the world, their humility, modesty, simplicity and love of solitude. I saw their vigils, fasts and mortifications, their devotion to mental prayer, their prompt obedience and the spotless purity of their lives. In very truth from that humble dwelling the sweet odour of their conversation and innocence of life ascended before God and angels and men like the frankincense of Saba that diffused itself through the city, as from a heavenly thurible, edifying both Catholics and heretics with its spiritual fragrance ." [note: Ibid., f. 458.] When Inchiquin got control of Cork in 1644 and expelled the whole Catholic population, the friars had to leave; but they re-opened their friary in 1649. Our history gives the names with many details of the labours of the Capuchins in Cork city and county during the seventeenth century and, though in the next century the records are scanty, they warrant us in stating that here (as well as in Dublin and Kilkenny) the succession of friars has been maintained unbroken from the time of their arrival until the present day. No name, however, of an individual friar residing in Cork in the eighteenth century emerges until 1766, when we learn from a contemporary document that two Capuchins, Father James Hoey and Father Bryan McDonald, resided with Father Denis Leahy, P .P., in a house in Blackamoor Lane, numbered 194, in which eight Catholics altogether lived. 

“Father O’Leary’s Chapel”
The little community received an increase in 1771, when Father Arthur O'Leary was sent by his superiors from St. Mala's in France, where he had been educated, to Cork. He began at once the building of a suitable place of worship . " This church was remarkable for its dwarfish dimensions, its utter want of architectural grace, and its perfect seclusion from the public gaze . ... It was not much bigger than a respectable barn, and but for the galleries might have passed for one. Yet, it served its purpose; it had its day, and was not unknown to fame. For half a century it was celebrated far and near as 'Father O'Leary's Chapel’ ; and for a subsequent generation it enjoyed, if not a better merited, at least a more widespread notoriety, as the church to which the world-renowned ' Apostle of Temperance , was attached. " [note: Life of Rev. Arthur O'Leary, O.M.Cap. By Rev. M. B. Buckley, p. 20.] In this unpretentious edifice Father Mathew ministered during practically the whole of his priestly career. An interesting story well known even at the present day tells of a remarkable occurrence with which Father Mathew was associated in the early days of his ministry. It was recalled by the late Denny Lane at a meeting held in Cork on Sunday, February 24, 1889, to inaugurate the celebration of the Centenary of the Apostle of Temperance in the following year, and his graceful narration of the incident will bear repetition. " I don't know whether any of my audience present ever heard a legend which was common among the people of Cork about the origin of Father Mathew's success in the temperance crusade. I think it is very beautiful. I will tell it as it was told to me. One evening a poor old woman was so absorbed in her prayers in the little Capuchin chapel in Blackamoor Lane - mayhap praying for the husband and the children who had gone before her, and preparing ere long to meet them - that she did not notice the closing of the chapel doors. She fell asleep, and when she awoke her aged voice was too feeble to be heard, and she had no resource left but to wait for the coming dawn. Soon again she fell into a deep sleep, which was broken at midnight. To her astonishment she saw the candles on the altar lighted, and from the door of the sacristy came forth the vision of a Franciscan vested for the holy office of the Mass. The figure stood at the foot of the altar steps and turning round, asked if there was anyone to answer Mass; but there was no reply. Three times the same question echoed from the walls of the empty chapel, to be followed each time by silence, and then the priestly apparition with a sigh, as it were of one who had abandoned hope, left the altar, and re-entered the sacristy. The church relapsed into darkness, and the old woman was left a prisoner until the morning. Immediately after the chapel doors were unlocked the poor old woman went to Father Mathew and related her story to him. He requested her to tell no one else, and that night he locked himself into the church, and in prayer prepared for the midnight hour. When it came the apparition presented itself, and again thrice repeated the same question. At the third time Father Mathew replied that he would answer the Mass, and he was told to come forward and repeat the responses. The figure ascended the steps of the altar and celebrated the sacred office, and at its conclusion explained to Father Mathew the cause of his nocturnal visits. He had been in days long past a Brother of the Red Abbey, and having been guilty of some want of reverence in the celebration of the Mass, he was deprived of the sight of Heaven until he could again celebrate the office with all due solemnity, and so purge his soul of the fatal consequences of his sin. ' And now,' said the Presence, ' I go to behold what I have so long sighed to see, and when I pass the crystal gates and prostrate myself before the sapphire Throne, my first prayer shall be for whatever object is dearest to the heart of him who has emancipated me from my bondage.' ' Then,' said the holy priest, ' pray that it may be granted to me that I may have the grace and the power to free my fellow-countrymen from the one degrading vice that, like a leprous spot, deforms souls that in many other respects are so noble and so pure.' ' I promise,' replied the apparition, and then faded away as mysteriously as it had come. The next day Father Mathew commenced that great crusade to which he devoted his time, his prayers, his marvellous energy and his life. " I do not ask you to believe in the literal truth of this legend of our own days. Like many of the golden legends of old, it may be fable in part, but true in essence, and may be only one of the shapes in which abstract truths have grouped themselves into concrete forms-forms which render those truths more easily ' understanded of the people,' . . . In the story I have told, you recognise the bond that unites those who remain behind with those who have gone before, qui nos praecesserunt - the gratitude of the released captive to the man who has delivered him from a 
Capuchin Church and Friary, Father Mathew Quay, Cork
painful bondage, and the aspiration of a holy and devoted man for the release of his fellow-man from a worse servitude-worse, far worse, for from one there is a certain redemption, but from the other, who can fix the day of emancipation?" "Fable in part," it might have seemed to the speaker; but by many who in Cork hold in highest reverence the memory of Father Mathew, it is told to this day as one of the instances of the Apostle's intimacy during his life with the unseen world, and a proof of his great holiness and nearness to God. 
Father Mathew’s church
" The wretched crib in Blackamoor Lane," as J. F. Maguire styled the Friary church, had become far too small for " the large congregation that constantly overflowed into the lane in front of the entrance . The church itself exactly measured 43 feet in length and about the same in breadth; and from the rails of the altar to the interior of the porch the space did not exceed 28 or 30 feet." When it became known in l832 that Father Mathew had decided to build a more commodious church, a site for the new edifice was offered by the City authorities on Sullivan's Qyay, opposite the Grand Parade, on or close to the ground now occupied by the Fire Brigade station. Maguire attributed the refusal of this offer to obstinacy on the part of Father Mathew. " At times," he wrote, " he was impetuous and not a little self-willed; and in hastily obtaining another site (in an impulse of irritation at what he conceived to be an unfair demand) he made a fatal mistake, and acted in direct opposition to the wishes of his committee." This was the judgment of his biographer; but the motive that guided the mind of the priest was very different indeed. To a relative of his, who was a nun in Cork and who passed to her reward in 1914 at the venerable age of 84, Father Mathew revealed the real reason of his choice of the site on Charlotte Quay, which explains why he adhered so determinedly to his decision. Surely, it will not be regarded as an instance of special pleading but an act of simple justice that the truth regarding this matter should be recorded and made public. Father Mathew, according to his relative, had a particular zeal for the spiritual welfare of sailors who in the days of sailing ships had so few opportunities for attending Holy Mass or receiving the Sacraments. Perhaps his special interest in them may have been due to an incident of the early years of his ministry which according to Maguire left a deep impression on his mind. This is the biographer's account of it. " It was on a Sunday morning, when he had been engaged in the church from six o'clock until after ten in hearing confessions, celebrating Mass, and again hearing confessions. He had been in his confessional the night before till eleven o'clock; so that, when on the morning he was about to leave the church in order to get his breakfast, it might well be supposed that he was both hungry and weary. But, as he was just about to leave, four sailors rolled in and requested him to hear their confessions. ' Why did you not come at a more reasonable hour? ' asked Father Mathew, in a tone of momentary irritation, 'I can't hear you now: come in the morning.' The sailors turned to go, when a devout poor woman, who had witnessed the interview, gently approached him and touching his arm said, in a voice of respectful entreaty: 'They may not come again, sir.; 'This implied remonstrance made an instantaneous impression on his mind, and running after the sailors, who had left in the meantime, he brought them back to the confessional and remained with them until he had administered the sacraments to each. He then entertained them at breakfast and dismissed them in a happy state of mind. He afterwards thanked the poor woman, ' through whom,' he said, ' the Holy Ghost had spoken to him.' " At this time Charlotte Quay was one of the chief places for disembarkment and for the unloading of vessels. Often as he passed along the thought occurred to Father Mathew that if there were a church at that particular place, many poor sailors would avail of the opportunity to slip into the church to say a prayer, hear Mass and get confession. The site offered by the Corporation was not far away, but a stone bridge and a weir intervened between it and Charlotte Quay to prevent vessels from coming up the river to that place, and this rendered the proposed location as unsuitable from Father Mathew's point of view as the little church in Blackamoor Lane. Hence, it was zeal for the salvation of poor neglected sailors and not an impulse of irritation that was responsible for the decision of Father Mathew to erect on Charlotte Quay - since named in his honour Father Mathew Quay - the graceful Gothic church of the Most Holy Trinity one hundred years ago. For some years after the laying of the foundation stone the building of the church made great progress. Father Mathew was helped by substantial contributions from wealthy friends, and rejoiced in the rearing of a worthy temple under the title that appealed very much to him-that of the Most Holy Trinity. When funds were exhausted he obtained from the Board of Works a loan of one thousand pounds in 1837. In the following year he was led by the hand of Providence to the Total Abstinence cause that henceforth was to claim his entire service until the day of his death. Work on the new building was suspended and, if subsequently, it was resumed, the partial completion was due to the members of the Capuchin community and their friends. Denny Lane on the occasion already mentioned accounted for the unfinished condition in which the new church was left by the Apostle. " His (Father Mathew's) fellow-countrymen and others were not ungenerous to him, but he was doubly generous to God's poor. What he received with one hand he gave away with two, and I verily believe that, beyond the clothes he wore and the very humble house in which he resided, he lived in a state of truly apostolic poverty. That very house itself was scarcely a home; it was more a bureau from which he administered a large undertaking, and dispensed a more than princely bounty. And that is the reason why this other house of his, this church, was not completed by him. If he had elected to husband the generous offerings of his friends, it would have been only a matter of weeks to have gathered as much a would have completed this edifice, which has remained for so many years unfinished. Much as he loved the glory of God's house, and the place of his habitation, he felt more for the necessities of God's poor. Loud as was the call on him to complete the church, its sound was drowned in the cries of the widow and the orphan which daily filled his ears, and the entreaties of the penitent profligate whom he had reformed. I read lately in Sacred and Legendary Art, by Mrs. Jameson, a beautiful story of St. Thomas. The Apostle was appointed, it says, architect to an Eastern King. This earlier Kubla Khan ' did a stately pleasure-dome decree,' and departing on his travels left a full treasury to St. Thomas; by using the contents of it the builder was to have the palace completed on the King's return. But when he came back the palace was unbuilt and the treasury was empty, for St. Thomas had given all it contained to the poor. The Apostle was sentenced to death ; but that night the Satrap of the East had a vision in which he saw the veil of Heaven lifted, and amongst the eternal mansions a palace of surpassing beauty. He asked whose it was, and he was told that it was built for him by the prayers of the poor, whose needs had been supplied, and whose wounds had been salved by the treasure which the Apostle had so nobly lavished. Now, there is a close analogy between that legend and Father Mathew's case. After a long interval the legend repeats itself in truth, and the Apostle of Temperance, in leaving this church unfinished, only imitated the example of the Apostle of the East, who built a shrine not on earth, but in Heaven. It now remains for us who have come after him to pay the debt which he left undefrayed, and to complete what, if a less holy, is still a holy fane." In 1848 the Fathers of the community organised collections throughout Ireland to enable them to make the new building suitable for Divine service. This year also the citizens of Cork subscribed the sum of £320 for a memorial to the Liberator who had died the previous year, and it was decided that the memorial should take the form of a monumental Stained Glass Window in Father Mathew's new church. The window was finished and placed in position in the church on August 7, 1850. The total cost was stated to be £525. The following description of it appeared in Battersby's Catholic Registry of 1851 : 
"Father Mathew’s chapel in Cork." 
" In this noble building, which is nearly completed, there has been erected a most beautiful stained glass window over the altar. It is an ornament in keeping with the church itself, and reflects the highest credit on the gentleman who has put it out of hands. The history of this window is : A fund was collected in this city towards the raising of a national monument to the memory of O'Connell, about £350 and, in consequence of some circumstances it was ultimately decided by the committee, in whose hands it was, that the money should be devoted to the erection in Father Mathew's chapel of a monumental window. The execution of the task was entrusted to Mr. J. A. Gibbs of London, who has accomplished it in a most felicitous manner. The window is illustrated with eight different scenes from the life and death of our Redeemer-the Annunciation, the Adoration of the Wise Men, Christ disputing with the Doctors in the Temple, the Baptism of Our Lord, the Last Supper, the Crucifixion, the Ascension, and Day of Pentecost-each subject being surrounded with an illuminated border of brilliant but not gaudy colours. At the two openings below are the Virgin and the Redeemer, and above is a representation of the Trinity. The whole window has a most imposing effect, and excites a reverential feeling in the spectator, carrying him back to the religious grandeur of the Middle Ages. At the right centre there is the head of St. Francis and the arms of the Order of Capuchins; and on the left below are the arms of the O'Connell, from which, across the base of the window, runs the following inscription in illuminated characters : Sacred om gratitude and affection to the memory of Daniel O’Connell, the Liberator of his fellow Catholics from the Penal Code, and assertor of the equal rights of all communions to civil and religious freedom. R.I.P. This beautiful monument reflects equal credit on the skill of the artist and the good taste of the Committee." An interesting note in the annals of the Cork community, from which many of the above facts have been taken, states that " the heads from which the arch of the large entrance to the church springs were cut by Hogan, the eminent sculptor." On Sunday, October 6, l850, Mass was celebrated for the last time in the friary church in Blackamoor Lane, and with it ceased the association of the Friars with this district that had lasted for centuries of stress and storm. On the following Thursday, October 10, the birthday of Father Mathew (who was at the time conducting his Total Abstinence campaign in America), the new church of the Most Holy Trinity was opened. The consecrating prelate was Dr. Delany, Bishop of Cork, assisted by Dr. Murphy, Bishop of Cloyne and Ross, and Dr. Walsh, Bishop of Ossory. The sermon on the occasion was preached by Dr. O'Connell of Waterford . Henceforth the church was used for Divine service; but for forty years afterwards it remained in the same condition as on the opening day. The efforts of the Fathers of the community were devoted to the reduction of the heavy debt with which they were burthened. It was estimated that up to May, l854, a sum of £17,000 had been expended on the building. Of the sum of £1,000 borrowed by Father Mathew in 1837 from the Board of Works, only £250 had been repaid, and in the interval the liability together with interest had amounted to £1,300. On the application of Mr. Fagan, M.P., supported by other influential gentlemen, this sum was remitted by the British Government on March 31, l854. At length it was felt by the citizens of Cork that the unfinished condition of the church was a reproach to those who revered the memory of Father Mathew, and it was resolved in l889 to wipe out that reproach, and to discharge this last debt which had far too long continued due to his name. A national appeal was, therefore, made for funds to complete the sacred edifice and, as a result, the church was finished by the erection of the facade and spire in 1890 as a memorial of the Centenary of Father Mathew's birth.
