Now coming on Spring the days will be growing 
And after St. Bride's Day my sail I will throw, 
Since the thought has come to me, I fain would be going 
Till I stand in the middle of the County Mayo. 
For months Raftery's poem had been echoing through my mind the while the Mayo County Council were debating the advisability of accepting a grant from the Carnegie Trust to establish a County Circulating Library. For a long time they hesitated, one section eager to welcome the gift of free books for the people, another fearful lest the promised gift should mask a dangerous weapon of imperialistic propaganda. At the time I was reading Michael Davitt's Prison Diary and his remarkable chapter in praise of Public Libraries, adjuring all friends of popular education to unite in agitating for the compulsory adoption of the Library Acts by the Local Authorities, struck me as being peculiarly applicable to the Mayo situation. I sent a copy of the appeal to the County Council and the dispute which had lasted over eighteen months suddenly ended. They had adopted the Carnegie Scheme, and I received notice of my appointment as County Librarian during a period of two years, in which the Scheme would be under probation and financed by the Trust. If at the close of that period, the Scheme were found to be successful it would be adopted by the Council, and a rate would be struck for its permanent amintenance. I conjectured that Davitt's words had still the same persuasive force for Mayo men as in the days when he launched the Land League from his native county. One grim November day I left the cheery homelights of Dublin behind and went westwards to Mayo. To me it seemed a journey of adventure and discovery, a journey to a country made glamorous by the paintings of the Henrys and romantic with the glow of its age-long history. It was one of the few counties where Gaelic culture had survived persecution and plantation-a land where historic sites, castles, raths, and battlefields waited for my feet-the land of Moytura, Croagh Patrick, and the Cross of Cong, the home of the historians, Cucogry O Clery and Duald Mac Firbis - of Dr. MacHale, the Lion of Tuam; of Michael Davitt, Raftery, and many another great-souled Irishman. I felt elated at the thought that the nature and scope of my future work would afford me the privilege of helping to realise and continue in some small measure the ideas and efforts of these great patriots. 
My first day in Castlebar was wet and dreary. A fair was being held in the streets. The faces of the country-men driving their cattle appeared to be the living types of Keating's picture, " The Men of the West." They had long-jawed, grimly-set, patient faces, with deep thinking eyes, faces which bore in their appearance of defiance, resignation and fortitude, the whole history of their race. My first task was to secure premises for the new Library. I was told that two towns had contended for the honour of housing the Library- Claremorris and Ballinrobe. About a mile from Claremorris, in the middle of a windy, desolate plain, is the disused Workhouse and Fever Hospital. Here the Council had indicated certain rooms which might be used for the purpose of a library. As I looked round the dank walls and through the bleak deserted passages, I fancied that I could hear the sad plaints of the Famine victims in the weird moaning of the wind sweeping down the chimneys and out through the creaking, barred windows. "Ye'd have no neighbours here but the rats, Miss," remarked the caretaker. I agreed and fled precipitately to Ballinrobe. Here the kindly hospitality and warm welcome of Monsignor D' Alton combined with the sheltered, friendly aspect of the place almost inclined me to pitch my tent in the available rooms at the workhouse. The position of the town at the southern extremity of the county made it unsuitable for the operation of a scheme which involved the service of the whole county. Yet, I could not help regretting my departure from the dear little town by the Robe with its pleasant, shady walks and its beautiful church with the procession of Irish saints shining in a glory of rich, flaming colours from the grey walls. Harry Clarke left some of his finest work in those windows. The first meeting of the Library Committee was held in the Courthouse, Castlebar. It was presided over by the Most Rev. Dr. Naughton, Bishop of Killala, and it included some of the highest ecclesiastics and leading men of the county. It was decided to request the County Council to provide rooms for the County Book Repository in the Courthouse, Castlebar. Two rooms were found in the Courthouse, and given up to the Library Committee. For the first few months I was busily engaged in preparing the first few thousand books selected for inclusion in our stock. These were made up from lists on different subjects submitted by me to the Book Selection Committee, together with additional lists forwarded by people anxious to take charge of local branches. The Book Selection Committee was fortunate in possessing the services of such cultured members as Mgr. D'Alton, the eminent historian ; Canon Hegarty, well known for his strenuous efforts to improve the condition of the people living along the western seaboard; the late Dean Macken of Claremorris, and Mr. Moran, M.A., of Malaranny. Most of the books purchased were of national interest : Irish History, Biography, Economics, stories of Irish life, and books in the Irish language. The Committee, which included thirty-eight members from all parts of the county, was thoroughly representative, and took a lively interest in the development of the Library. The members advertised the Scheme in their own districts, and organised Local Committees to take charge of branches. The clergy spoke to the people on 
Beautiful Mayo
Turlough Tower / Lough Fee / Newport / Convent Church, Foxford / Croagh Patrick / Lough Cullen / Cathedral Cliffs, Achill
Sundays about the Scheme, and arranged meetings after Mass, at which Committees were organised and arrangements made for the establishment of local libraries. One of the first branches was formed at Ballina. The Local Committee, under the patronage of the Most Rev. Dr. Naughton, included the leading men of the town. They were most energetic in securing premises free of charge and installing therein the necessary equipment : bookpresses and card cabinets. The Editor of the Western People was a member of the Local Committee and helped the progress of the Library immensely by the publicity paragraphs in his paper. Twice a week the Library was open to the people-on market days and Sundays, when it was served by voluntary library helpers under the direction of Mr. D . F. Courell, Principal of the Primary Schools. Ballina is the finest town in Mayo with its broad streets, prosperous shops and considerable facilities for cheap transport of goods by land and sea. Some of the big shopkeepers have a fairly large overseas trade, and you will always see a Belgian or other foreign vessel unloading in the harbour. One of the first places to which I paid pilgrimage was Tubbernavine, the Well of the Fenians, the birthplace of John of Tuam. Here he learned his first lessons from a hedge schoolmaster, " with the blue vault of heaven his canopy, his desk the bosom of mother earth, her lap the seat in which he rested; a rude cabin, with turf seats along the whitewashed walls, afforded a shelter from the inclemency of the weather." He was only eight years of age when the French troops swept by this place on the road to Castlebar, and all through life he was to bear the memory of that march and of the martyrdom of the patriot priest, Father Conroy of Foxford who helped the French on their way. His early training and impressions surely moulded him to become the lion-hearted champion of his people, and to defend them against such
Brigid Redmond
 iniquities as the Whately-planned National Education, and the equally degrading Poor Law system. At Killala, the parish priest took a kindly, practical interest in the welfare of the Iibrary. He had the cares of his parish heavy upon him, striving to build a sadly needed new church, and endeavouring to have a fishery school established for the fishers of Lacken and Killala. The little old town of Killala looked as if it had not changed since the day when Humbert landed at Kilcummin yonder in '98, and marched hither with his thousand French troops. Bishop Stock, the Protestant Bishop then resident in Killala, gives a very quaint account of the invasion. He tells how he was entertaining some British officers and ladies to dinner, and how the party, mellowed by good wining and dining were amiably discussing the Irish situation when the servants rushed in shouting, " The French are in the Bay! " Soon the French troops filled their catle and broke up the merry party. The Bishop was quite distressed to see the French hoist above the castle gate " the Irish flag of green with its gold harp and the inscription, ' Erin Go Bragh ' importing, as I am told, Ireland for ever.'' The Bishop's Palace still stands in Killala, though merged ignominiously into the old workhouse . When the Local Committee secured the use of the Boardroom for the purposes of a town library, I wondered whether the room was identical with the Bishop's drawing-room, and whether he would have been greatly distressed at its present use. The parish priest provided the equipment free of cost. A local carpenter to whom I had shown pictures of rural library centres in other places produced an issuing counter in addition to the usual shelving. There was a good demand here for books on farming and for leaflets issued by the Department of Agriculture. The teachers of Killala were very enthusiastic about the local history of the place, and showed me their copy of O'Donovan's edition of Mac Firbis' Tribes and Customs of Hy Fiachrach, which they had bought at four guineas, and which they were delighted to get at the price. They were very proud of living in Tyrawley, a country of such ancient historic associations and prouder still of being able to claim Duald Mac Firbis, last of a long line of annalists to the O'Dowd family, as their countryman. The story of Mac Firbis' life makes very sad reading. He, the Gaelic scholar " of the seed of the Poets," was born into the evil Cromwellian times when the O'Dowd family, the patrons of his race, were themselves dispossessed and there was no noble Gaelic family left in the country to shelter the historian of the race . Harried about from place to place, living in poverty and misery, with marvellous courage and zeal for learning he was able to accomplish such works of research as the Genealogies of the Irish race, and all his work was done not for money, but for the '' honour of God and the increase of knowledge to students." In his old age, he was stabbed to death by a Cromwellian soldier. The town of Killala has an ancient remote appearance which it gets perhaps from the situation of the Round Tower, dominating the main street from the parish priest's back-yard, and the proximity of the old castle and cathedral opposite. For over a thousand years, that tower has overlooked the destinies of this people, to whom it has always been a symbol of their ancient culture and religion. The first application for a library centre came from Miss A. McMahon, Keel, Achill, This Dublin lady has, for years been spending her time and, money in the effort to improve the condition of the poorer classes in Mayo. At this time, in co-operation with the leading men and women of the county, she had just founded the Mayo Industrial Association. The aim was to reconstruct the industrial economy of the county by exploiting all its natural resources. Their scheme was very ambitious. It included, amongst other things, the revival of all the old cottage industries, handloom, weaving and spinning, woven furniture manufacture; the provision of marketing agencies for Foxford materials; of factories to absorb the minor products of agriculture ; the building and equipment of a County Technical Institute of Arts and Crafts ; the development of Marine Industries. I attended meetings of the Association and listened to most inspiring addresses on the past prosperity of the county, when every town had its own flour mill and brewery, and its own snuff and tobacco factory, when Ballina was famed for its linen yarn and the Union of Castle bar, Westport and Ballinrobe employed 30,000 people in the linen industry. The eloquent Dempseys were plentiful, but not a single Henry Ford stepped out when the Association tried to interest the moneyed folk in their enterprise. The Association carried on bravely for a while and did excellent work in advertising Mayo products and encouraging the sale of home-manufactured articles. One most essential reform was discussed at the meetings of the Association. This was the necessity of federating the cottage industries throughout the country and of securing the services of one expert designer and one marketing agent for all. Each little industry was trying to work for itself in a business subject to frequent fluctuations, and in which they had to compete against the highly organised - mass productions of foreign labour. The same person had to be teacher, designer and marketing agent. I saw one result of the Association's work at the County Feis the following year when all the children appeared dressed in a fine, home-made white flannellette, tailored in Celtic design and suitably embroidered. Miss McMahon, in the midst of all goods; of a ready-made factory for her work, found time to interest herself in the library and introduced branches into five districts of Achill. My first sight of Westport, Malaranny, Achill and the country round Clew Bay was in the nature of an apocalyptic revelation. It was autumn The ever changing colours on the bogland the mist-laden opalescent atmosphere captured the imagination so and completely that the whole landscape became that of an ancient folk tale. It was timeless ; there was no yesterday, - to-day or to-morrow in these dim, radiant spaces ; the redskirted Achill women, the brown donkeys with their panniers of turf were figures in a dream, the road winding up by sea and moorland with its boundary walls of white stone outlined against the dark peat cuttings was the way to a mysterious shadowland. Malaranny recalled Paul Henry's picture of a child in a tattered magenta - frock set against a hillside seamed with stone walls like lead in stained glass. Achill is all mountain with its highest peaks at Slievemore and Croghann. A line of golden sands curves round the bay of Keel in dainty contrast to grim Croghann whose massive shoulder protects the tiny villages from the full force of the Atlantic gales. Northwards are the Cathedral Cliffs with their strange aisles and inner sanctuaries through which the waves rush headlong at hightide. A picture of these cliffs, executed by Paul Henry, hangs in the Jeu de Paume in the Luxemburg Gallery in Paris. The rye crops were ripening to gold and the place was gay with the scarlet skirts of the women who do most of the field work, since their men folk have gone to English and Scottish harvestings. The Achill harvest consists of rye kept in small haggards, with low stone walls, dark comfortable ricks of turf and stores of hay. The beautiful church at Achill Sound, built mainly by the free labour of the people, is a witness to their deep religious faith and childlike trust in God. One old man, speaking in Irish, said to me " I only knock down the grass, God gives the hay." It was he who told me about Nangle, and his settlement of "jumpers " at Dugort ; how he acquired some acres of moorland and built thereon his church, schools and orphanage to pervert the starving people in the Famine days. He had a printing press from which he issued a monthly known as the Achill Herald, and also copies of the Bible in Irish. Nangle must have spent immense energies and money in the task, and now the work has withered, and his name is held in bitter execration in the island. An alien culture transplanted to this home of ancient sanctities was foredoomed to blight. The Franciscan Brothers at Bunacurry made a brave stand against the Soupers here as in Tourmakeady. A Franciscan Brother at Foxford told me the story of the Tourmakeady struggle against the Soupers. Bishop Plunkett had settled on an estate here during the eighteenth century. The Famine gave his followers the opportunity " to force upon a superstitious peasantry the enlightenment of scriptural education. " Protestant schools were erected, manned with Bible readers and teachers, and the people on the Plunkett estate were threatened with eviction if they did not send their children to these schools. Dr. McHale called the Franciscans to his aid, and in a little cabin on a corner of Mr. Moore's estate, the brothers maintained a gallant and finally victorious struggle against the soul snatchers. For a long while the crowbar war was carried on. On one occasion, a company of soldiers was brought from the Curragh to protect a gang of emergency men at their cruel work of eviction. Three generations slept under this roof tree which had sheltered their fathers before them. The evictors threw out all the household gear, beds, bedding, and the very pot containing the morning's breakfast of porridge ; the infant in the cradle was slung out on the wet roadside, and the poor dazed parents followed in despair. At last, the grandmother who with her husband had surveyed this scene from the hearthstone broke down. The old man, gently supporting her feeble footsteps, led her out, whispering to her these words of consolation- " Asthore, the Passion of Christ was greater than this." The Franciscans drained and reclaimed their land at Tourmakeady, and built schools and a woollen factory for the education and support of the people. A Preparatory Training College for Teachers and an Irish Summer School now stand in Tourmakeady, fitting monuments to the sufferings of that devoted people. The Plunkett lands are divided among their descendants who are proud to witness the honour paid to that language and culture which their fathers helped to preserve for the race. An energetic young teacher had a branch of the library established here, and formed a students' reading circle for the study of Irish Literature. When Miss McMahon left Achill, her friend, Miss E. O'Flaherty, Dooagh, took charge of that branch of the library. Miss O'Flaherty has a wonderful knitting industry, dedicated to St. Colman. It is a long low house with pleasant sunny rooms where some twenty or thirty girls work happily at their machines all day. They produce all kinds of woollen goods, costumes, bridge coats, coats of finely-woven wool with colourful designs skilfully worked. Miss O'Flaherty visits Paris yearly and brings home new ideas in artistic designs along with contracts for work. St. Colman's products find a ready sale in some of the big Dublin houses. The walls of the bright cosy workrooms are hung round with pictures of Achill, presented by some of the painters who delight to frequent this paradise of artists. It is Miss O'Flaherty's ambition to have a complete picture gallery of the work of Irish artists here for her girls. On Saturday evenings, they have a ceilidhe and the large " Master's Voice " Gramophone or piano supplies music. Sometimes Miss O'Flaherty is able to secure the services of a friend to give lectures on Home Nursing or First Aid, or those of a Department Instructress to give lessons on poultry culture. The girls 
Providence Woollen Manufactory, Foxford 
were very fond of the library, and continually demanded fresh supplies of books by Irish authors. That memory of an miniature rural industry built up by the patient industry of one able woman recalls the miracle of Foxford woollen factory produced by the labours of a community of women, the Irish Sisters of Charity. Around Foxford the bogs run into barren hills, desolate ridges, and sullen infertility. There is grey stone everywhere-in the fences, hungrily circling round the hardwon pockets of tillage, piled high in mournful mounds on the top of every little peak. Suddenly, out of the middle of this wilderness, a town arises. There are churches, schools, fine dwellinghouses, a beautiful parish hall, and a splendid woollen factory equipped on the most modern lines, with agencies in every part of the world. Sixty years ago, Foxford was a dingy village of sooty thatched cabins, housing a wretched population of spailpíns who eked out their existence by a yearly migration to England's harvesting. The sole beauty of the region was the noble river Moy, flowing with a vast volume of overflow water from Lough Conn under the massive arched bridge. A Sister of Charity recognised the possibilities of the water power combined with the proximity of sheep hills, secured the ruins of the corn mill below the waterfall and built thereon a factory which has become one of the most successful in this country and around which a model town has grown up. " It is the story of a struggle against singularly adverse conditions, in which success was achieved by resolute, systematic, persevering heroism.'' The convent and church are appropriately dedicated to Divine Providence. In the church the representation of the Eye of Providence is seen above the High Altar. There is a men's club attached to the works, with a reading room equipped with fire, light and books. The nun in charge was delighted to add the collection of new books from the library to her store and at the exchange period always sent in long lists of new books requisitioned by her readers. Foxford has a fine parish hall, built to honour the memory of Admiral Brown, a Foxford man, who spent most of his life in the Argentine Navy. The Swinford Local Library Committee were particularly anxious to secure a branch of the County Library, and when a new courthouse was being built, they took care to have the architect include a special room for Library purposes. One Swinfordian, an aspirant to Dáil honours, admired the Library when it was installed in the courthouse, but announced impressively at the end of a long harangue, " There's a little book worth a hundred of yours. There's information in it about fairs and markets, and changes of the moon, and what's more, there's poetry in it, too." He drew out a copy of Moore's Almanac and started to deliver a piece of " poetry " therefrom, to the huge delight of a cheering audience. One of my most pleasant Mayo memories is that of my visit to Killeaden, Raftery's birthplace, a few miles beyond Kiltimagh, beside the home of Miss L. McManus, author of the finest Irish historical novels yet produced. She received me with courteous hospitality, and introduced me to her neighbour, an old man with a great love for history and old tales and legends. Speaking in Irish, he told the story of Raftery, the poet who had been born here, and had lost his sight at the age of nine years, had grown up unlettered, but learned in the history and lore of his country and with the gift of song. Miss McManus has recently written an account of her life's reminiscences in a book entitled White Light and Flame . She relates how the chance reading of two books on Irish civilisation by George Stokes changed her political beliefs and her whole mental outlook, how she was inspired to learn the Irish language and to produce books which were the offspring of a true national spirit. She tells of her connection with the Irish Literary Revival and of her efforts to found the Gaelic League in Mayo. Miss McManus had a small Library centre at Killeaden. At Kiltimagh, the Sisters of St. Louis undertook the charge of a branch, for the people of the town. The most fertile district in Mayo is probably the region of Ceara. Raftery corroborates this opinion in his poem 
I solemnly swear that the heart in me rises 
As the wind rises up and the mists break below 
When I think upon Ceara and Gallen down from it 
The Bush of the Mile and the Plains of Mayo." 
One of the most interesting sights in this district is the Abbey of Ballintubber, near Ballinrobe. Built in the thirteenth century by Cathal Mór O'Connor of the " Wine Red Hand," it has dominated the destinies of the people hereabouts for over 700 years, and is still used as a place of worship. The Abbey, built in the early Gothic style was defended by a castle, which contained a prison and a courthouse Cuirt na Mbrathar. Kneeling in that ancient church, the trammels of the senses are loosened and one knows oneself to be at one with the race, past, present and to come, united with them through the dim ages by a common faith and tradition and by the sense of common frailty and mortality in the presence of the Eternal God. While organising a library here, I met an old man from the Partry Mountains whose only language was Irish, and who recited two wonderful poems he had composed on Croagh Patrick and on the Rising of 1916. Of my journey from Ballinrobe to Cong, only two outstanding features are impressed on my memory. The first is a huge cairn of stones crowning a low height, a monument of the famous battle of Moytura ; the other is Lough Mask House. This was the home of Captain Boycott, the landlord whose gross tyrannies were the means of creating the most effective weapon within the law for the relief of a harassed people. Most of our earliest applications for Library centres came from West Mayo, the O'Malley's country round Clew Bay. The memory of Grania Uaile, their great sea queen, still lives around the shores of Clew Bay, and many stories are told of her daring feats by land and sea. The square headed crest of Clare Island across the mouth of the Bay recalls the days when Grania' s galleys lurked in its haze and Grania ruled from her stronghold, the undisputed Queen of the Western Seas. . . . She is buried there and her church of grey stone stands sentinel over her tomb. Around Clew Bay stand the monuments of the piety and martial spirit of the O'Malleys. The Black Abbey of Murrisk was founded and maintained by them until Bingham's cannons made quarries of the Friars' cloisters. The White Abbey of the Dominicans at Burrishoole and Kildavnet Church in Achill flourished under their protection until the close of the sixteenth century. History and tradition attest that Grania was a vigorous and diplomatic ruler. What she could not get by fair fighting, she secured by temporising and by marriage alliances. One of her most famous castles was at Carrigahowley, the Rock of the Fleets, on the bank of a small stream at the head of the bay, The deep harbour gave good shelter to her fleet of galleys, which were often drawn up under the battlements of the fortress with, it is said, a hawser from them attached to the foot of Grania's bed. For forty strenuous years, she held this west country, and out-manoeuvred successfully all Elizabeth's dodges to trap her. The present population of Clare Island show that they have not lost the old spirit of independence inherited from their freebooting ancestors when they make their united resistance to the yearly demand for rates. They contend that it is not just to demand payment from them for the maintenance of roads and other services on the mainland. At all events, they were delighted to get the Library books for which they sent over a boat every six months. The fishers on this coast with their skin coracles, such as were used a thousand years ago, may, in a lucky season, bring in their share of the sea's harvest : mackerel, herrings, and lobsters. They are timorous with these coracles, and cannot venture far from the safety of the coast and the islands. Their chief needs appear to be properly equipped fishing craft, training in the use of the craft, curing stations, a central marketing system, suitable transport facilities, and the construction of a central deep sea pier. All these desiderata will cost much money, but while awaiting their advent, it seems absurd that the residents of these western towns should find it necessary to buy their fish from Dublin. On the shores of Clew Bay, near Newport, stands the White Abbey of Burrishoole. Mr. P . O'Donnell, County Councillor, a renowned local historian and antiquarian, who was keenly interested in the Irish History section of our Library, gave me the history of Burrishoole and of the O'Donnell family who came here from Donegal. The Abbey was founded by the Bourkes for the Dominicans and dissolved at the end of the fifteenth century. There was a convent of Dominican nuns, also, which held out till 1653, when the two surviving nuns were done to death by Cromwellian soldiers. In the graveyard, a Celtic Cross, encircled by a pikehead crowned rail, over the grave of Father Manus Sweeney commemorates the martyrdom of a young patriot priest who was hanged from the market crane in Newport in 1798 for his sympathy with the National cause. The Castlebar people treasure the memory of another patriot priest, Father Conroy of Foxford, who was hanged for informing the French of a short route across the hills from Ballina to Castlebar. Burrishoole graveyard contains the remains of another patriot, Cucogry O Clery, last of the Four Masters. In his will, written in Irish in one of his manuscripts preserved in the R.I.A., he requested burial in this sacred earth. After his Donegal lands had been forfeited, he being " a meere Irishman and not of British descent," he migrated to Mayo, where he lived at Gort na Heilte in Ballycroy, one of the most desolate places in this region. The Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell, which Cucogry composed jointly with his father Lewy, afterwards edited by Rev. Father Murphy, was one of the most popular books in our Library. The O'Donnell of Newport House, who is descended from a junior branch of the famous Tyrconnell family, has in his possession, the precious relic known as the Cathach of Columcille. This is a fragment of the Psalter written by Columcille, and preserved in a jewelled case. For centuries, it was borne by the O'Donnells into battle as a shield against their enemies. One of the O'Donnells who accompanied James II from France brought the Cathach with him and deposited it in an Irish monastery in Flanders, with a written order that it should be given to the chief of the name when called for; Sir Neal O'Donnell of Newport claimed and got it. At Castlebar, the Local Library Committee established their town library in the Pioneer Hall, and provided a room shelved for holding books. They also applied for a special collection of non-fiction books for the use of the Men's Club. Castlederg always appeared to me in a dual light. By day, it was a thriving, bustling market town ; with the twilight, it invariably took on a medieval quality. The convent on the rock at the head of the steep, narrow Castle Street, became once more the feudal fortress of the Barrys, the Bourkes or the Binghams. On the bridge over the waters now silver in the moonlight, one might catch a vision of the skirmish between the French soldiers and the redcoats. Down the Ballina road they galloped, those gallant little Frenchmen, just a thousand of them against 6,000 British, and drove the enemy exultantly in mad, headlong rout to Athlone. Then, for one glorious week, Castlebar was a Republic. After his victory, Humbert drew up a provisional constitution to organise supplies for his army. The Directory was to consist of twelve members, of whom General John Moore of Moore Hall was named President. Castlebar got its first experience of local self-government when a Mayor was elected together with two Justices and six municipal officers. The President issued paper money in the shape of assignats in the name of the French Government, good for half a guinea. During this week of freedom, the President entertained the inhabitants of Castlebar to a Victory Ball. There in the old Town Hall, ablaze with light, and gay with the colours of the French and Irish uniforms, the allies danced the laughing hours away. A week later, the Republic had fallen, the redcoats had retaken the citadel and the gaiety of the dance was exchanged for the keening of the women over the dead bodies of their men folk hanged on the green. A hundred years later, Castlebar celebrated the memory of that splendid week. Contingents from every district in the county, with French representatives, marched in procession, bands playing, colours flying, to Frenchill, outside Castlebar, to honour the memory of the French who had fallen there in 1798. Amongst those who addressed the people on that memorable occasion was William Rooney, then a young enthusiast whose energies were completely devoted to the furtherance of the National cause. Speaking in Irish, he adjured the people to cultivate their own language, to educate themselves in the history of their race, not to continue taking their teachings from public platforms, but to read and think for themselves. To help their efforts in this direction, he founded the library in Castlebar known by his name. Thirty years later, the County Library Committee added the few surviving books of this collection to the new town library. When the first few centres had been established, every district in the county clamoured for books. One application requested a collection of Irish ballads, speeches and folk lore to be read aloud at gatherings of neighbours round the fireside. Eithne Carberry's Four Winds of Erin, Rooney's Ballads, Historical Ballads of Ireland, Speeches from the Dock, Hyde's collection of Ballinrobe folk tales, Beside the Fire, delighted them. Some districts requested sets of plays, some in Irish, some in English, for the use of their dramatic societies. At Straide, Davitt's birthplace, an audience of Irish speakers were most appreciative of a play written in Irish by a Mayoman. Books in Irish by Connacht writers were popular, but not the Munster writers whose works were only read by the teachers. One Achill man who had read Seadna, told me in disgusted tones, " there is no story in it ; it is sheer childishness from beginning to end." There was a great demand for books on cattle diseases, poultry-keeping, and agriculture. There was also a good demand, particularly from country people, for books of a religious nature. There was an ever-increasing demand for books with an Irish Ireland outlook, books dealing with national history, biography, economics. The Library stock was advertised through descriptive articles in the local papers, by circulating lists of books on different subjects, and by book exhibits held at the local Feiseanna. The Library became an enquiry bureau as well as a book repository. People came here with all sorts of queries ranging from the best method of treating swine fever or the warble fly pest, to queries on trademarks, Land Acts, egg-testers, and dry fly fishing. In one wild district, a tall, gaunt Scotsman kept a shop besides a crossroads, and had charge of a collection of books. The books, he told me, were eagerly and widely read ; but there was one book in particular that he wanted for his own use. "Ye see, the people in these parts are always goin' to law over their bit o' land and when they go into Ballina, they must pay down at least seven-and-sixpence to the attorney before he opens his mouth. Now, if I had a book on the law, I could mebbe give it out to the poor people and save them a lot of expense and trouble." I gave him a copy of Everyman His Own Lawyer, but have not heard that his reading made him a serious rival to the Ballina lawyers. Wherever one turns in Mayo, the high uplifted cone of the Reek, Croagh Patrick, dominates the view. After a while, it begins to possess the imagination with the same glamorous effect as the opalescent atmosphere. Every year on the last Sunday of July, Westport witnesses the same manifestation of Faith-thousands of pilgrims from all parts of Ireland and from the greater Ireland beyond the seas journey to the holy mountain to share in St. Patrick's vigil and penitence. Standing on the summit of the mountain with the great Atlantic winds racing tumultuously above your head, you begin to realise the courage of our great saint who came up here to wrestle with his own soul. 
Alone to that great hill of eagles named 
Huge Cruachan that o'er the western deep 
Hung thro' the mist, with shadowing crag on crag, 
High ridged, and endless forest long since dead. 
Year after year, down through the centuries, the Irish race have followed patiently in his footsteps. My last glimpse of the Reek was at sunset. With that golden chalice suspended above its summit, wrapt in a mystic haze of delicate light, the Holy Mountain seemed a High Altar, a breathless place of worship, the crown and glory of the hills of Erin. Before I knew Mayo, I had pictured it as a land of romance and fairy glamour ; on my departure from Mayo, I had learned that the rocks underlie the romantic scenery. I had learned the life of the Western people, absorbed in wresting a bare livelihood from the ungrateful soil ; their bodies always earthbound, their souls always in the stars. My memory of an Erris landscape crystallises my impressions of the Mayo character. Stormy cloud masses move across the sky, the twisted branches of a few trees are strained inland under the force of the sea gales ; far up on the dark mountainside, one lonely cabin clings to the grey rocks. It is a picture of desolation and defiance ; but the men who are formed by this grim environment are the true salt of the nation.
