Wicklow, pearl among Irish counties, has never failed to ravish the eyes and hearts of her million admirers. Like the sky-maiden of Irish poetry she it enthroned on her starry heights, veiled in the colourful lights of changing seasons, remote and peerless. The spirit of eternal youth exults in her shadowy glen, her wine-coloured hills, her branchy, fairy-haunted woods. Her great granite mountains lean grey faces against the stars. Their cairn-crowned crests are older than the snowy Alps and the hoary Himalaya . " They are older than Cailleach Bheara, who knew seven tides of life. " The dim tarns hidden in their fold may have mirrored the faces of Danaan gods whose memory still lives in the folklore whispered by night round the hearthstones of the little cottages clinging to the hillsides. Mountain walls rim the horizon at all points. Their dark depths enclose St. Kevin's sacred city where the dust of Irish kings reposes in the shadow of the cone-shaped tower and the mournful yews. The roads curve and wind in twist and leaps around the mountain ranges, springing fresh surprise at every corner, often breaking away from the main route and impishly careering up moorland slopes in quest of strange adventures. Beauty holds her mirror here at a thousand angles. All the scattered glories of Nature are gathered here in a brief space: brave windy highlands; dark watered valleys, red with rowan fire; heathery slopes, afire with golden gorse blossom, fragrant with " heady " incense, vibrant with ecstatic lark song. 
'' This grey earth is holy 
From the sunstones of Mashog 
To the seven eyes of the rainbow 
In the still waters . . . " 
So mused Joseph Campbell as he gazed on Lough Tay, and meditated how he would interpret the beauty of the earth of Cualann in his poems. The mystery of its antiquity fascinated him. His poem on Lough Dan conveys a sense of the subtle influence of this lureland. 
Beauty has brought me many lovers 
But only to you have I given love. 
Your eyes are moon bows, 
Your breasts white sands, 
Your thoughts, 
Fishes leaping from the silence of brown water 
Tell me your secrets 
For love is a secret unmasked. 
I am old. 
Old? 
This rowan mouth ? 
This sedge dark hair ? 
These mists folding you as a queen is folded ? 
These lilies at your feet ? 
Older than Cailleach Bhéara who knew seven tides of life. 
I have known but one and it has never ebbed ; 
A stream poured out from Cradle Top, 
By the Cold Inches and the Ford of Cow 
Into the heart of Tethra's cauldron 
I cannot die 
As Beauty cannot, 
Nor as Love. 
Campbell's strange, sad mentality seems akin to that of J. M. Synge who also tried to voice the spirit of Wicklow in his travel notes and plays. "The Shadow of the Glen," " The Well of the Saints," and " The Tinker's Wedding" have caught the speech and idiom of the people, and a sense of the sights and sounds amid which they pass their lives, but of their spiritual selves we see nothing. He imparts the melancholy of his own mind, brooding over a diseased body, to his description , and violently exaggerates the loneliness, and solitude of "glens where you do be seeing nothing but the mists rolling down the bog and the mists again and they rolling up the bog, and hearing nothing but the wind crying out in the bit of broken trees roaring with the rain." His notions of country people, based on casual conversations with vagrants showing them as sunken in poverty, morally degenerate, living in dread of the madhouse and the poorhouse, are a fantastic caricature of reality. Sometimes he catches the spirit and atmosphere of life in the glens as in this " I'm smelling the furze a while back sprouting on the hill, and if you'd hold 
your tongue, you'd hear the lambs of Grianan, though it's near drowned their crying is with the full river making noises in the glen.” Among others who have hymned the praises of Wicklow scenery are the tribe of tourists from Scott, Lockhart and Thackeray down to the hikers of the present day. Like the sheep on the Wicklow hills, they all follow their predecessors through the same gap of conventional tradition and time-honoured prejudice. In florid, obsequious language, they praise " this fertile county thickly inhabited by gentry who have their seats in the most pleasant places," and whose " exertions to improve the minds of the peasantry are unceasing." They lavish fulsome adulation on Powerscourt, Kilruddery, Rosanna, Shelton Abbey, with all their scenic appurtenances ; the Dargle, the Devil's Glen, Woodenbridge and Moore's far-famed Avoca. Their polite effusions have nothing to say about the crumbling walls of empty farmsteads, the roofless abbeys, the gallows hill, the decaying towns with their huge barracks and ponderous jails. They have nothing to say of ruined homes and penalised worship and heartless evictions. It is indeed a strange anomaly that Wicklow, the envied prize of so many greedy planters, should be reckoned to-day left from the great storm and the streams among the poorest counties in Ireland. Her rich vales and glens have long borne the burden of exploitation by men of little vision and less executive power. They busied themselves, as the guide books say, in laying out their ornamental gardens and rustic banqueting halls when they might have improved sheep farming, the principal agricultural industry of the county; cultivated forestry, encouraged woollen factories or worked the mines. The guide books have nothing to tell of the age-long, valiant struggle waged by the native race to keep their possessions in this fair land, of their conquest and attempted enslavement. Three centuries ago the O'Byrnes and O'Tooles held sway over Cualann and Sean Buidhe's tribe of Wingfields, Parsons and Esmondes had not yet arrived. Then came the wars of extermination and Clan Rannall was ground under Clan Saxon's heel. Here more than anywhere else in Ireland the English strove to stamp out the spirit of nationality. Successive plantations, Elizabethan, Cromwellian, Williamite, uprooted the native possessors of the soil and fixed in their places, English, Scots and Orange Ulstermen. You will find their descendants to-day behind many a shop counter in the towns or driving the plough on snug farmsteads in the rich vales; gingerfaced, ashen-eyed, a dull, countryless, traditionless tribe. The large proportion of small farmers with un-Irish names in this county as compared with other counties shows their origin as soldier settlers and evidences the fact that the native clansmen were not allowed to remain on the land after the spoliation of their chiefs. They were driven like grouse into the hills which sheltered them and their children for many generations. So there are two races in Wicklow, the children of the Gall that inhabit the fertile lands of whom the guide books speak and the children of the Gael that, for the most part, still live " to the west of English law " in the mountainous regions and keep the memories of the past alive in song and story. Outside the Gaeltacht no county is richer in the lore of its country's- past. The glens and mountains keep their old traditions and legends. On St. Brigid's Eve, a cross is made of straw and hung up behind the door or buried in the fields and left there till the following St. Brigid's Eve to bring good luck to the crops. On Christmas Eve, the glens are luminous with the light of candles placed 
Brigid Redmond
in cottage windows to welcome the Mother of God and her Child. Odd individuals are credited with unusual powers. The mountainy people have many tales about the fairies, they are supposed to be the angels that remained between Heaven and Hell when Lucifer and his tribe were cast out of Heaven. The trees on the rath, the lone bush, the thorn tree are held sacred to them. One day, in Glen Shee, the fairy glen at Glenmalure, I chanced to pick some ripe, black sloes from a blackthorn. An old farmer watching, warned me saying, " Don't touch the sloes ! " " What harm is it ? " I asked. " Harm ! 'Tis harm to touch anything belonging to the Good People." " I was feeling hungry," I complained. "Better hunger all day," quoth he grimly, " than be haunted at night." The port towns have their own peculiar beliefs. In Arklow, on St. Martin's Eve, the blood of a cock used to be sprinkled on the four comers of a room. The fishermen say that on St. Martin's Eve Death is abroad on the waters, and that it is unlucky to go to sea on that night. On Good Friday, all the ships in the harbour are turned towards the quay. The old generation of Wicklow fishers prefer to sail sunwise and with them the possession of a caul is a talisman against drowning. 
The mountains have preserved any national feeling that still exists in the county. A mass of high mountain ranges, like serried battalions, runs through Wicklow from Bray to Lugnaquilla, the highest point, intersected by long, precipitous ravines, running in parallel directions. No pass bridges this granite country between the narrow, coastal plain of Wicklow and the basin of the river Barrow without the necessity of a stiff climb. The mountain ranges with their natural fortifications were the best allies of the Irish clans until the military road was run over the western slopes of Featherbed, past Glencree, through Calary bog, skirting Glendalough and traversing the wild heart of Glenmalure, so that it cuts across the head waters of those crystalline streams that meet in the vale of Avoca. At Glenmalure the British built one of their military barracks to aid them in the fight against Michael O'Dwyer and his gallant comrades of '98. Before it was finished, O'Dwyer set a train of powder to the building and blew it skywards. From Glenmalure the road climbs a steep ridge and then travels in wide downward curves across the seawards side of Lugnaquilla. Here, at the head of a long, torrent-seamed valley which runs down to the Meeting of the Waters, another barrack was built which was destined to become the home of rebellion when Parnell and his followers foregathered there in after years to discuss plans of campaign. These dark, strong mountains are symbols of strength, endurance, defiance. They have endured a centuries old conflict and the clash of race against race on their brave, windy highlands. Their walls re-echoed to the triumphant gallop of O'Toole's riders returning after a successful border foray and still oftener to the caoine of defeat which went up after some deed of Saxon treachery. They looked upon the flight of Red Hugh O'Donnell and his comrades from Dublin Castle to the warm shelter of Ballinacor and witnessed the death agony of Art O'Neill whose body lies yonder on Table Mountain. Two centuries later they saw O'Dwyer float the Irish flag once more within their fastnesses and witnessed many a gallant stand for liberty. In Fenian days, they beheld men gather on the heather at the" Rising of the Moon," and still later, they saw Pearse's men drill for the same cause. The tide of human life flows past them from age to age, and still they lift their changeless stony faces to the sky, true images of Eternity. Standing on the skyey heights of Lugnaquilla, the "hollow of the grouse," you are in the centre of Wicklow and close to the heart of her glorious history. Here, with the great winds racing above your head and shouting tumultuously in your ears, in these wide, craggy spaces, you will feel the breath of freedom stir your blood and understand how it is that a mountain race is never tamed. 
“Their dream is of the swift sword thrust, A lightning glory of the Gael." 
Westwards lies the Glen of Imaal, where O'Dwyer and the heroes of' 98 made their last desperate stand. To the northeast stretches Glenmalure, execrated in Elizabethan State papers, and Ballinacor, the strong fortress and eyrie of that kingly eagle, Fiach MacHugh O'Byrne. Down that deep glen the mountainy men, with the skirl of warpipes in their ears and the O'Byrnes' banner flashing bravely above their heads, hurled Lord Grey de Wilton's proud army to death. Over to the north, past grim Luggela, Lough Dan, and beyond the spurs of Mullaghcleevaun and Thonlagee, Red Hugh O'Donnell passed on his fight to Ballinacor. Eastwards see woody Derrybawn and the dark, bold peaks of Lugduff and Mullagh Corr defending St. Kevin's beloved sanctuary and cathedral city, Glendalough, a holy earth, consecrated to God forever by centuries of prayer. Around you, on the steep sides of Lugnaquilla, the hollows of cold grey rock, "prisons," as they are called, uplift their mountain altars skywards bearing silent witness to the faith and endurance of our people in the Penal Days, when Christ Himself was homeless and an outcast in our wild glens. Looking out upon these wide horizons, a host of memories surge in the mind and the sense of all that our people did and endured in the past and the pride of belonging to such a noble race rise in the soul and fill us with tumultuous exultation. The main roads from Dublin to Wicklow are lined with the high walls of big estates, miles of grey stone enclosing them from the public eye. They recall the time when the landowners were at war with the " mere Irish," and lived in daily terror of the vengeance of the Wicklow clans who, as Spenser complained, were continually "hanging over the neck of the city." The erection of such barriers to enforce freedom to enjoy their possessions is alien to the Irish mind and distinctive of the English settlers in their colonies and other foreign parts. One of the loveliest of these roads passes through Rathdrum and the Vale of Clara to Glendalough. From Rathdrum the way winds in a leafy green tunnel past quiet, sloping fields and long shadows into the wonderland of the holy glen. The road takes a sudden twist out of the sunlight into a dim valley, shut in like a vast temple, with mountains rising on three sides, leaving only one entrance open like a cathedral door. Masses of serried pine trees sweep down the mountain slopes to the glimmering waters of the lake. The cone-shaped Round Tower seems to have grown up from the earth with its company of grave, dark yews, silent amid the clustering gables of ancient churches. A massive Celtic Cross looks down upon the graveyard whose soil is compact of thousands of generations of Wicklow men. St. Kevin's contemplative, ascetic soul must have rejoiced to find such a sanctuary for the '' place of his resurrection." Like Marbhán, the poet-hermit, he must have exulted in the beauty of his mountain home. 
'' The heavy branches of the green backed yew 
That seem to bar the sky, 
The spreading oak that shields me from the storm, 
When winds rise high. 
Rich rowan clusters and the dusky sloe 
The bitter, dark blackthorn 
Ripe whortleberries, nuts of amber hue 
The cup enclosed acorn........ 
Voice of the wind against the branchy wood 
Upon the deep, blue sky. 
Most musical the ceaseless waterfall 
The swan's shrill cry ." 
Like St. Francis of Assisi, St. Kevin's gentle soul made friendship with birds and beasts. Once, a king hunting a wild boar through the valley, came upon the hermit praying under a tree with hosts of birds wheeling about his head and nestling on his shoulders. All the stories about Kevin portray him as a very meek, lovable saint, fit patron of the shepherd folk among whom he lived. When Dublin was still a struggling settlement, Glendalough was a walled city. The arched gateway to the city still remains, though the tower that once crowned it has gone with the walls. The city is supposed to have extended from the Refeart Church to Trinity Church on both sides of the river. From the market place, where a market cross formerly stood, a paved road led over the mountains into Kildare. To-day, fourteen hundred years after Kevin's death, his shrine attracts hundreds of tourists. Every foreign visitor to our shores is brought to Glendalough, the glen of the saints, which so fitly symbolises the enduring power of holiness. All through the summer months the place is loud with a motley throng, but go there in the autumn, when the tide of tourists has ebbed, and the wooded mountain slopes are colourful with changing hues, and at evening time, 
"When the gloaming's on the mere 
And the shadow people pass, " 
you may catch the sound of church bells softly chiming, or hear the chant of monks "float down the hushed waters of the wind.'' 
If you ascend from Rathdrum into Glenmalure, you leave behind the cultivated scenery of East Wicklow with its turreted mansions and walled gardens and enter into an epic world still blooming with the freshness of the heroic dawn. Wave upon wave, the warm wine-coloured hills roll away into dim,' remote distances. As you climb, the hills appear to lift you up and up, shutting a door between one's self and the lower valley world. Slowly the hills unfold hidden beauties. Little nooks within them open and show lime-white cottages shining in vivid green spaces; a group of amber-stemmed pines, lofty and clear-branching , over rocks hooded in shadows; tumbles of grey boulders half-hidden by sprays of carmine foxglove. An ancient quern lies forgotten in the ferny hedge. Another fold opens on the horizon and there in a grassy hollow, shadowed by the eagle-winged hills, is Ballinacor, the capital of Clan Rannall's territories. An occasional shepherd's whistle or the bleat of sheep accentuates the elemental quiet and wonder of the place. Goats stray about the hilly slopes. It is such a place as James Stephens discovered where he thought : 
'' If I were as wise as they 
I would stray apart and brood ; 
I would beat a hidden way 
Through the quiet heather spray 
To a sunny solitude. 
I would think until I found 
Something I can never find 
Something lying on the ground, 
In the bottom of my mind." 
Down the glen, speeding eastwards, 

Upper Lake, Glendalough 

the Avonbeg river flashes like a sword of light to join the Avonmore at Avoca. This is the stream cursed by Spenser as " the baleful Oure, late stained with English blood." It is alleged that Spenser was "somewhere in Wicklow," probably visiting with his friend, Lord Bacon at Dunganstown Castle when in 1580, Fiach MacHugh O'Byrne hurled the English army to destruction from these heights. 
The most famous of all the Glenmalure chiefs was Fiach MacHugh who ruled the mountain clans during Elizabeth's time. " He paid no rent to the Queen, but enacted much black rent from her subjects. No bailiff or tax gatherer entered his dominions. He was as much a king as had been any of his ancestors, ere the Norman set foot in the land, and was styled king, or righ, by his Irish bards. He was sovereign in his territory, and blackmailed territory not his own. And yet the capital of this singular realm was not forty miles from the Castle of Dublin." While O'Neill was leading the Ulster clans to battle, the Leinster chiefs were attacking the enemy from every vulnerable point. Ballinacor was the centre of the Leinster resistance. Here, in company with the Kavanaghs, James Eustace, Viscount Baltinglass, Walter Reagh, the Brown Geraldine, and his foster son, Owny O'Moore, son of the redoubtable Rory, Chieftain of Leix, Fiach prepared his plans of vengeance on the enemy. Lord Deputy Grey, newly arrived in Dublin, thought at one stroke to break O'Byrne's power. He gathered a great army and marched into Wicklow, on through the wild mountain heights till they reached Glenmalure. As his soldiers entered the glen, a long line of buff and scarlet, gunsmen and horse, O'Byrne's men sprang from the tree-clad slopes and threw themselves upon the foe. The army was utterly routed. After this, Fiach went to attack the English power in Carlow. As they marched on the way, Fiach's pipers played for the first time that well-known air, "Follow me up to Carlow." 
" Up with halbert, out with sword, 
On we go, for by the Lord, 
Fiach MacHugh has given the word; 
Follow me up to Carlow." 
Fiach put up a good fight for seventeen years. But the English had guns and a long purse, and armed with both these essentials, they won the final victory. Fiach was caught at last, by treachery, and the brave warrior's head was sent in triumph to the Queen. Mountjoy surrounded the glens with an iron ring of castles. The country was made shireland; part of South Dublin , Fer Cualann ; and part of North Wexford, Hy Kinsella, were combined to form the County Wicklow. Now Lord Grey's advice was carried out, namely, the confiscation of the tribal lands, the banishment of their owners, and the planting of these same lands with a foreign stock, loyal to the king. Some of the poems found in the Leabhar Branach, the Book of the O'Byrne's, contain vivid descriptions of sixteenth century life in the Gaelic household of Ballinacor. Eochaidh Ó hEodhasa sings the praises of the house where he had found a generous and frequent welcome. 
" Beloved to me is this house I am leaving, 
Populous burgh of many a lime-white lios, 
Mansion of fairy light ..... 
Dear to me the joyous uproar of its chiefs ; 
Dear to me the beauty of its bright rooms ; 
The frolicking of its clean built wolfhounds, 
Its gay caparisoned horses at their speed ... 
I loved the heavenly dulcet melody of its harps 
The voice of its yellow-tubed trumpets. " 
Rory MacGrath, in his lament for Ballinacor after Fiach's death, describes the place in the days of peace when young soldiers came there to learn the art of war. 
" How is this dwelling now forlorn 
Where once the heroes gathered to their sport. 
From morning until evening's cloud, 
Along the grassy rampart of the sunny lawn 
There was gay uproar of lasses and of lads. 
Men from every part came there 
To learn the uses of the spear and sword ." 
When Clan Rannall ruled at Ballinacor the O'Tooles were lords of North and West Wicklow, with lands stretching from Carnew and Kiltegan to Bray and their chief castles at Carnew, Castle Ruddery guarding the entrance to Glen Imaal Castlekevin at Annamoe, and Powerscourt, on the Dargle river. Before De La Poer, the Anglo-Norman Knight got possession of the Powerscourt lands, the place was called Stagonil, Teach Chonaill, after the name of the saint who set up his house here. The O'Tooles did not suffer De La Poer to enjoy his possessions for long. When the castle was finished, they raided it and drove the foreigner out. Then followed a conflict lasting over three hundred years between the ancestral owners of Stagonil and the newcomers who called the place Powerscourt. O'Toole had his gallows on the fairy moat, still to be seen in Powerscourt, and there for many a year, he hanged as many loyalists as disturbed him. During the Elizabethan wars, the O'Tooles, with the O'Byrnes, were at bay, their backs to the rocks that had sheltered them so long. Fer Cualann, with its rich pasturages, its deer coverts, its colourful glens and fishful streams, excited the cupidity of Richard Wingfield, who after crushing Sir Cahir O'Doherty's rebellion in the North was given the grant of these lands as a reward for "his distinguished service." The last of the O'Tooles who lived here, Fiach, was killed by Jacques Wingfield in the hollow near Powerscourt church known as "Killing Hollow." In the kitchen-yard of Powerscourt House, built into an angle of one of the offices, Fiach's head in stone looks gloomily out at the home of his ancestors. It is interesting to compare two accounts of Powerscourt written in the early 'eighties, the one by an English traveller, the other by J. O'Donovan. The first relates how "the parish of Powerscourt is inhabited by a happy and comfortable tenantry," that in" 1798, Lord Powerscourt with the true spirit of his great ancestors continued to inhabit his mansion and fortified it for defence when all the nobility fled to the capital for shelter and retreat. On the roof of the house which was flat and sheeted with lead, his tenantry, now converted to his faithful yeomanry, kept constant guard. " O'Donovan, commenting on the large size of the Protestant Church explains it by the fad that the bulk of the tenantry were Protestants " who hold the best part of the lands, the Catholics being principally located on the mountain sides and in the rugged bottoms of Glencree." He adds that " the Protestants here appear to be the descendants of some of Cromwell's followers." 
The history of Wicklow is mainly concerned with the efforts of the invading race to scale and capture the mountains from the coast, and the struggle of the mountaineers to force them back. The first English castle built in Wicklow was at Bray where De Ridelsford raised his fortress on the edge of the cliff just above the road which tribesmen would pass on their border forays. The Slighe Cualann road from Dublin led down Bloody Bank, where the convent of the Sisters of Charity is now, across the flats by the line of Back Street and crossed the river by a ford where the bridge is to-day. To the south rose Slieve Cualann, and above it towered the dark heights of Douce and Kippure, outlying ramparts of the home of the Wicklow clans. Little Bray castle was a link in the chain of castles that stretched from the South Dublin marches to Arklow. For centuries, this castle was the battered outpost of a foreign garrison in the heart of an enemy country until the first road was made through the Glen of the Downs up to the O'Byrne's castle in Newtown. The part of Bray beyond the Dargle continued in Irish hands until taken by St. Leger and Ormonde. The town of Bray appears to have developed around the castle. The impress of the Meath family is over the place. The Town Hall windows are adorned with their arms; the principal houses and terraces were erected from their plans; the Esplanade and seafront are their property. The natural way for Bray to develop would be along the river bank east and west of the bridge.. The river Dargle could be deepened to the harbour and the sea, and the rise of factories on the banks would encourage population and growth. The people of West Wicklow have many stories about '98 and the doings of Wicklow heroes at that time. When the cruelties of the Orange yeomanry drove the Wexford people to rebellion, their Wicklow comrades were the first to come to their assistance. Michael O'Dwyer, from the Glen of Imaal, was one of their best leaders. For five years, with his band of trusty mountaineers, he held out valiantly against his enemies, who gradually encompassed him on all sides. The British built roads into the interior of the mountain glens and raised barracks at strategic points at Laragh, Glencree, Glenmalure, Aughavannagh, to control the passages to the glens. The yeomen h ad a regiment of Highlanders sent on O'Dwyer's track, and O'Dwyer fled for refuge to his old den, St. Kevin's bed, the cave in the rocks overhanging the Upper Lake, Glendalough. A cripple, bribed by the yeos, guided the soldiers, and just as he was pointing out the outlaw's hiding place, a musket shot crashed out, and the informer fell dead, pierced to the heart by O'Dwyer's bullet. The Highlanders battered the sides of Lugduff with volleys of shot, until they were certain that their victim was dead. The colonel ordered two of his men to swim across and bring out the body. They swam the lake, climbed the rock, swung into the cave; from thence, one after the other, a strong arm stabbed them to the heart, and hurled them into the swirling depths below. The colonel commanded his men to bring scaling ladders and rafts. While these were being procured, he ordered a fire to be lit, lest the outlaw should escape under cover of darkness. As the order was given, a loud, scornful laugh rang across the waters and the men shivered with the fear of unknown terrors haunting that mysterious place. While they were under the influence of this fear, O'Dwyer escaped from the cave into the neighbouring woods. When some hours later, the colonel and his Highlanders escaladed the rocks, they found an empty cave. In 1803, Emmet sent guns to O'Dwyer's men and O'Dwyer visited Emmet in Dublin. On a fixed day, he led five hundred men to Rathfarnham but their help was not sought and the rising failed miserably. After this O'Dwyer, at the end of his resources, surrendered to Colonel Hume of Humeswood, and was transported to New South Wales where he died in 1826. General Holt, another Wicklow leader, encamped in the Devil's Glen, kept up a war of mountain skirmishes and for six months defied the united efforts of the British army and numerous corps of yeomanry in an area twenty miles square within thirty miles of Dublin. 
At the arts and crafts' Exhibition held in Wicklow in 1931 by the Wicklow Town Development Society, a collection of relics relating to our national past was proudly displayed. Chief among these were the memorials of '98. Michael O'Dwyer's dagger rested beside the musket and bayonet belonging to the notorious Hempenstall, " him that was called the walkin' gallows, bad luck to him." There was a piece of the doorway of the house from which O'Dwyer escaped when McAlister fell at Glen Imaal. On that occasion, O'Dwyer was hidden with some friends, including McAlister in a farmhouse in the glen when the place was attacked by the British. O'Dwyer and his comrades defended themselves bravely until the house caught fire and McAlister's arm was broken by a musket shot. He said to O'Dwyer : " I am now useless, and cannot get away : when I stand at the door, do you and the others rush out and they'll fire at me." This was done ; McAlister and all, except O'Dwyer, were killed. Wicklowmen afterwards raised a statue to the memory of the brave McAlister at Baltinglass. Under an oil portrait of General Holt stood a collection of pikes, and a pistol used at Ballyellis, the scene of Holt's first victory over the British . The face of Billy Byrne, a Wicklow leader of '98, looked out from another frame. Billy Byrne of Ballymanus, descended from the stock of Fiach MacHugh of Ballinacor, the pride of the United Irishmen, was executed as a traitor by the British on Gallows Hill at Wicklow. The people put up a monument to him in Wicklow town and made a ballad in his honour which has been sung at every fair and public meeting in Wicklow from that time to the present day. Stone axes used by hunters of the neolithic age in Wicklow forests rested beside a bronze spear and sword wielded by some giant Celt on Cualann's foes before ever an O'Byrne or an O'Toole settled in these regions. A stone lamp, a quern for grinding corn, a bronze cauldron, sent the mind groping back through the mists of a thousand years to vision the homes and hearths of our ancestors. Spinning wheels, rushlight holders, horn goblets, illustrated the home life of the Wicklow glens fifty years ago. An old pot-still that once brewed mountain dew on Wicklow hills excited much interest. Beside these emblems of the people's past stood one symbol of the conquering Gall, the silver mace, crown topped, which was presented to the town when it was created a borough. For generations the mace was placed before every meeting of burghers, and before their successors, the members of the corporation . With crown draped, it used to be carried in state at the funerals of members of the Town Council. Very few Irish towns have had this mark of British favour, but the royal desire to reward local loyalty gave Wicklow its silver mace, along with a grant of the Murrough and the land within the town's area. A complete set of Wicklow ores included lead from Lugganure, a casket made from the ore, copper from Avoca, china clay from Kilbride, peacock ore from Cronebane, and a cast of the twenty-four ounce gold nuggets found near Avoca. The mountains that sheltered many an Irish outlaw bear a rich treasure of mineral wealth under their granite ribs. One day in the year 1770, a schoolmaster wandering in the valley of the Croghan Mountains came suddenly upon that " Lagenian mine " which formerly supplied Irish princes and princesses with their torques and lunulae of gold, and in search of whose sparkling treasure, Greeks from the Aegean seas adventured up the Avoca estuary in the bright young morning of early civilisation. The gold found was not mere ore but metallic gold, and Dublin goldsmiths gave weight for weight in standard gold for it. One nugget was sold for eighty guineas, and a gilt cast of it was deposited in Trinity College Museum. Within two years, the Government had secured gold to the value of £36,751. In 1820 they abandoned the work on the mines after receiving the official report of a special commission that the metal was not an inherent ingredient of the veins examined. Simoens, the Belgian expert, opines that the reopening of the gold mine may be a profitable proposition for a native government. The sulphur and copper mines at Tigroney, Ballymurtagh and Cronebane were opened in 1787 and proved more lucrative than the gold mine. The manufacture of sulphur extracted from copper pyrites was also carried on. Although a heavy duty existed on the importation of Irish ore into Great Britain, over 6,ooo tons of copper ore and the same amount of sulphur were shipped yearly from Wicklow and Arklow to Swansea. In 1852, 85 per cent of the total output of sulphur ore in Great Britain and Ireland came from Wicklow. Less than fifty years ago, lead mines were being worked at Glenmalure and Glendalough. Foreign competition however ruined the mines and none are working at present. 
One of the chief glories Wicklow is the beautiful woods that shelter the hillsides and arch the roads with leafy loveliness. The planters liked to surround their mansions with noble trees, yet fearful of the protection afforded by the forests to the mountainy folk, they despoiled them of their most precious possession. Wicklow woods boasted a centuries old reputation in European markets. From Shillelagh, the Norman Rufus had "all that frame of wood which made the roof of Westminster." Ballynafinshogue in Glenmalure recalls the fact that these now naked mountains once furnished stout ashwood to the O'Byrnes for making bow shafts and pike handles. Kippure keeps the memory of the yews from which they made their altars, shrines and house panellings. Names like Ballinderry remind us of the oaks and Sallygap of the wattles which they used in house building. The woods which once covered the mountains thickly formed an impregnable shelter for the clans until Strafford who had built his castle, locally known as Black Tom's Castle, at Tinahely, burned down thousands of pounds' worth of valuable timber. He gave some of the famous Shillelagh oak to roof St. Patrick's Cathedral. Orange William's penal code provided an enactment which prevented the tenant occupier from planting trees except under the most stringent regulations. At length, the British Government discovered that they had ruined one of their most valuable sources of revenue and allocated the development of Irish forestry to the Department of Agriculture which in 1903 established the first school of Irish forestry at Avondale, Parnell's old home. Experiments were undertaken to test the suitability of various forest trees for commercial planting and to prove the cost of production, yield in timber and comparative market value of the species planted. Forestry operations on a large scale were subsequently carried out at Glendalough and Aughrim. Gradually under the improved forestry laws made in recent years, Wicklow is recovering her precious heritage of woods. 
Wicklow is a quiet seaside town with her face to the blue, leafy hills which for centuries threatened her peace and her back to the silver waters from which the grim walls of the Black Castle rose to defend her security. The streets rise in terraces above the harbour, tier upon tier with steep, crooked lanes and flights of steps leading down to the quays. The main road enters the town beside the ivied ruins of a Franciscan abbey endowed by the ancient chiefs of Cualann and leaves at the upper end behind a grim-walled courthouse and jail erected by the powers that destroyed the abbey and its native patrons. They were difficult to destroy, these natives. They had a way of springing up continually in the most unusual places and after the most crushing defeats. Right opposite the courthouse, in an attitude of defiance and challenge, pike in hand, arm outflung, stands the soldierly figure of Billy Byrne, crowning a monument raised in memory of the Wicklow heroes of '98. Lines of tall, gaunt storehouses lie forlornly about the quays, evidences of the trade which ebbed away with the departure of the sailing ships. There are few of these slender masted ships left in the harbour now. Some blue jerseyed old salts lounge about the quay walls, men with wise, sharp faces and quiet eyes who have spent their lives battling the dangers of the seven seas and are now content to rest in blissful idleness. In deep, grave tones, they will tell you stories of warm-scented tropic seas, of marvellously coloured birds and of uncanny perils such as that befell a crew of Wicklow men becalmed in the tropics and forced by savage hunger and thirst to draw lots for the body of one of their number. So they ramble on with their 
" Sailor tales to sailor tunes ; 
Storm and adventure, heat and cold, 
And buccaneers and buried gold ; 
And all the old romance retold 
Exactly in the ancient way." 
Lying serenely in the shadow of the hills beside the murmuring sea with its quiet churches and peaceful homesteads, it is difficult to realise that this place is old, older than the capitals of Europe, that it holds a history of cruel persecution and wrongdoing and of the vicissitudes of three races who struggled to gain a foothold and make a home in this pleasant, fertile region. The Book of Armagh records that the place was known to the pagan Irish as Inbhear Dea. St. Patrick landed here at a place known as the Hawk's Strand, but getting a hostile reception, reembarked for a more friendly shore, leaving his disciple, Manntan, behind to found the first Christian church in Wicklow and give his name to the place. The pirate Danes of the ninth century, kings of the high seas, terror of European princes, discovered this sheltered creek offering safe harbourage for their long ships and built a fortress on a rock used afterwards by the Normans for the erection of their Black Castle. They put up the first beacon on Wicklow Head and called the place Wykinglo, the Bay of the Beacon. They had a settlement here, with their thingmote on the hill where in Norman times, St. Thomas' Church was built on a vine-covered slope and where the Protestant church now stands. Although these fierce Danes sacked our monasteries, they built up our towns and started our overseas trade. Three hundred years later, the Normans replaced the Danish earth fort by a strong-walled castle which was to remain an outpost of a hostile garrison for four hundred years. Maurice Fitzgerald was the first builder, then Fitzwilliam came and dug strong roots into the soil which have lasted down to the present day. During the wars which lasted from the thirteenth to the sixteenth centuries, the Irish clans held the place most of the time, but Cromwellian guns made it what it has been ever since, a place of antiquity. The O'Byrnes and O'Tooles founded a Franciscan abbey where their children were educated from the thirteenth century to the end of the seventeenth. The Friars maintained the language and usages of the people and kept records of the native race until these were destroyed by the barbarity of Sir Charles Coote who burnt the town and slaughtered the inhabitants during the Confederate wars. Dunganstown Castle is five miles distant from Wicklow. Those strong Norman walls, encircled by lines of black cedars sheltered Lord Francis Bacon in Elizabethan days. From these narrow loophole windows, Lord Howard of Effingham, High Admiral of the English navy, looked out towards the high seas and meditated on the doings of the Spanish fleets. At Castletimon some distance away, an ogham stone marks the grave of a princess. Further on, the twisting leafy road opens on the smooth strand at Brittas, with its little, sheltered coves and still, serene waters. Arklow is one of the most truly Gaelic towns in the county where the people have all the native dignity and charming good fellowship of the royal races from which these Kavanaghs, O'Tooles, Murrays and O'Byrnes have sprung. With its two churches dominating the scene, its quaint, twisting streets, and ancient fishing village, it is a genuine memorial of a medieval Irish town. Sea breezes redolent of tar, pitch, and cured fish greet you at the entrance to the Fishery, Arklow's "Sailor Town." It is just like the Claddagh, with its low, thatched houses, brown fishing nets, stray bits of sail, green sward and cackling geese and above all the old sailors and fishermen lounging about in their picturesque blue jerseys. There one day, I saw Padraic O'Conaire [Ó Conaire], the Galway shanachie, dressed in a seaman's jersey, seated on a piece of old timber, pipe in hand, arm outflung, lauding the glories of the sunset to a group of admiring old salts. " You are fond of Arklow," I said to one. " Fond of Arklow ! sure there's not a man of us but loves every stone of it," was the reply. No wonder they love their lovely seaport whose watery ramparts have been the grave of so many of their race. Looking over the quiet seas, one falls to dreaming of the many boats that found a path upon these waters and reached the shelter of this creek in past ages. Mayhap the first to cross them were the swarthy Greeks who sailed up the " big estuary '' bartering for Croghan gold and gave its name to the Avoca river. Then came the conquering Danes arrogant with the rich booty of the deflected Mediterranean trade and set up their beacon here as at Wicklow and named the place accordingly. Norman ships followed the Danish, and Norman imperial policy soon had a castle fixed on the summit of the hill, another link in the chain of military consolidation. The bold Fitzwalter, founder of the Butler family was the builder. He brought over the Cistercians from Lancashire who were the first to introduce contemporary European culture into Ireland. The castle survived as a storm centre until Cromwell passed by on his march to Wexford and battered it with his guns. Cromwell's march through Wicklow was no rose path as long as Colonel Bryan O'Byrne hung at his heels. At Ballycapple near Arklow, " his own proper horse and furniture were carried off from the camp by Christopher O'Twohill," whereupon Cromwell sent a messenger after him offering £1oo for the horse, but " for gold or for silver, Christopher would not give him, but preferred to keep him for a monument." Memories of '98 are still fresh in the memories of Arklow folk. They will show you near Father Michael Murphy's monument the place where that patriot priest was cruelly butchered by the British, and Coomie Lane where the headless Drummer still sounds his reveille. Arklow families preserve relics such as Billy Byrne's watch, the musket owned by the notorious Hempenstall who used to hang rebels from his own shoulders in default of a handy gallows, and the Rosary Beads owned by Father Woods who used to celebrate Mass in Penal times at the Hanging Rock up at Clogher Head. Once when the priest was saying Mass here, the redcoats came yelling up the slope, but were stopped by a huge boulder which fell from its position and came to a standstill in front of them. By the time they had got around the obstacle, both priest and people were safe from their pursuers. The battle of Arklow was one of the fiercest and most incomprehensible of the '98 campaign. After winning a decided victory and driving General Needham's troops far on the road to Wicklow, the Irish fell back on Gorey and through lack of an energetic central command, neglected to follow up the victory to Dublin. The witcheries of Wicklow derive most of their fascination from the romantic record of the race that once ruled over the ancient land of Cualann. The decendants of the old clans people the valleys and glens of Wicklow and gradually under the benign sway of a native government will regain their former prosperity. Whatever the future may hold for this county, it will always keep its ancient splendour, and continue to attract thousands desirous of attaining strength of body and serenity of spirit within the peaceful fold of its hills and vales. Men will always discover some fresh delight in this enchanted county ; a dark pool where the speckled trout glance and glide; a silver-stranded cove with cool waters phosphorescent under pale moonbeams; deep glens full of mysterious whisperings; a mountain top whose wings will bring you closer to God.
