The casual visitor to Sligo is content to follow the ancient road to the North which passes from Collooney to Sligo, and thence by Drumcliff to Bundoran. If he dallies in the " beautiful city " he may make a casual visit to Lough Gill and Dromahair. Seldom does he venture the trip completely around the lake, going from Dromahair by historic Killery to Ballintogher and thence by Slish Wood and the rock from which the Fiddler of Dooney is said to evoke the soul of the wind from ghostly strings. This portion of the parish of Killenummery, with Lough Gill at the foot of its mountains and glens is worth more than a passing glance. History has not often touched its winding mountain roads. There is not about them the wealth of tender and bitter memories which haunts the high road, from Moytura near Ballysodare, to the Teeling monument at Collooney, the ruined Abbey of Sligo, and Drumcliff, scene of countless battles between the invading Northerners and the chieftains of Connacht. It is hard to realise that the 
little village of Ballintogher was once a town, boasting a Mayor. It is true that its dignity only came when the English recognised its strategic importance, founding a foreign colony and building a castle which was a source of annoyance to the neighbouring chieftains. Flann Roe O'Flynn swooped down in 1266 and burned it, killing " the English of the town," but it was soon rebuilt, and retained as an important chessboard piece in the complicated politics of the invader. In due course it became a Puritan stronghold, then a Williamite centre of influence, and afterwards the only struggles which surged around it were on the 12th of July of each year. It is noted that the " Ballintogher Supplementaries" under a Captain Johnson, " rendered loyal service " in the yeomanry of '98 and 1803. But nowadays, at all times, the only disturbances are round the busy creamery in the morning, and when the periodical fairs invade the village. Through the trees at the upper end the new Church of The Little Flower raises its white Italian
Church of The Little Flower, Ballintogher, Co. Sligo
ate campanile. It was solemnly dedicated by the Most Rev. Dr. McNamee, Bishop of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise, on 1st day of October, 1933. Grassy terraces, rising from the road to the hill on which it was built, give a clear view from all the countryside around of this beautiful example of modern church architecture. The inside is in keeping with the quiet taste of the exterior: the Stations of the Cross are by Mr. Sean O'Sullivan, R.H.A., and one of them is reproduced as the frontispiece of this number of "THE CAPUCHIN ANNUAL." " Such suffering ! " was the spontaneous tribute of one villager as he saw it for the first time. Before leaving Ballintogher, one notoriety it possesses for the Sligo people may be told. An emigrant leaving the bay remarked to another Sligo man that there was rain in the wind. ''What would you expect? Isn't it a Ballintogher wind ? '' was the answer.
Strolling from the village down Crossboy hill the sunset behind Killery mountain makes a glowing palette, gold and crimson above the purple of the mountain, and below the white mist of the valley, and the strange tinge which the horizontal light gives to the green fields. The hills on each side of us hold the remains of many green forts, the strongholds to which the secret people of the Tuatha de Danaan retreated before the Milesian and the conquering steel of his sword. The passing of Patrick by that way to Collooney, in the course of his seven years wanderings in Connacht as recorded in the Tripartite Life. Then there is silence, but for the memory of curious things preserved in countryside traditions : the visit every seven years of a reptile to the well of Toberanania, one which the Saint is related to have driven from Killery; fire balls around the old castle; the enchanted cats which sneak around Killavoggy; haunted houses. These are in keeping with the cloud of mystery with which the dark-haired, brooding race preserved its defeated remnants from the fair-haired Milesians. Formerly the road to Dromahair ran through a forest, but this was depleted by the industrial activities of three or four centuries ago. In the time of Sir William Petty (whose survey must have inspired that recruiting canard of the Irish Parliamentary Party in 1914 about the German map which was supposed to exist showing every farm in Ireland) Cross boy was described as " verry good arrable land hath no woods unless a verie fewe shrubbes lies adjacent to the mountains but of itself hath no turffe" and" Gurth lownan " the neighbouring townland, as "verry pleasant and full of groves and shrubbes." There was nothing suppositious about Petty's lists ; in preparation for the plantation he noted with accuracy every parcel of fruitful land, and soon every valuable site from Markree to Lissadell was in the possession of the Cromwellians. " Casheloer," gathering darkness around us is like the Golden Cashel, on the hill road the twilight in which these people towards Sligo was another famous dwelt, lit for a moment by the stronghold, which in conjunction with Ballintogher Castle guarded the mountain pass. From the crossroads a mountain road winds down the valley and around the mountain to meet Lough Gill. By the side of this road is met the ruins of a very ancient church which has claims on our interest. Inside are the famous seven round stones, and their " straining threads '' reputed to possess a cure for sprains in " man and beast." Wood-Martin sees in them a link with ancient Babylonian superstition, but the local tradition is that St. Patrick blessed them. Catholics and non-Catholics alike use them, and the threads are sent for from even America. At the end of the road is the Island of Inisfree, lying close to the shore. Mr. Yeats would have to enlicit the services of a labour corps if he desired to translate his nine bean rows in to actuality. This little half acre of an island is surmised to have been once an island fortress ; the Four Masters relate that in 1244 Conor Mac Tiernan murdered a brother chief named Fergal Maccadane on Inisfraeich. About half a century ago the inlet in which is Inisfree was a quarrying ground for brick clay for Sligo, which was carried in barges across Lough Gill. Even to this day there is a small brick industry; and some of the farmers make bricks of excellent quality for local use. Over all this countryside of West Breffni broods the shadow of the O'Rourkes. Their name still lingers in the humblest homes ; the name of O'Cuirnian, hereditary bards to the sept is still to be found among their lineal descendants. Further 
down the road, a by-path leads to Friarstown and the Abbey of Creevalea overlooking Dromahair, and the Castle of the O'Rourke's. This was the last monastery erected in pre-reformation Ireland. The story is that a daughter of The O'Donnell's married an O'Rourke, and wishing to have the Franciscans from Donegal with her in her new home, she built the Abbey to induce them to settle in Dromahair. Father McKiggan, the Guardian, was designated as one of the instigators of the Rising of 1641 by the Puritan Sheriff of Sligo, Andrew Crean. (In these happier days a descendant of the Catholic Creans, Mr. Austin Crean, is Sheriff of the neighbouring County of Mayo.) From the Abbey in 1643 Brian MacDonagh, the last chieftain of Collooney, set out from the camp of the Irish division to meet his death in Manorhamilton. Here is how a local bard records a tradition of the Confederate Wars : 
"Down by this peaceful Abbey in the distant long ago The men of Breffni were reviewed by the gallant brave Owen Roe 'Twas here that brave O'Tracy proved a hero true and daring When he felled black Gilbert Harrison in the cause of Mother Erin. And Kathleen O'Cuirnian, his betrothed pure and free Did embrace her gallant lover by the Abbey of Creevalea." 
Passing over the footbridge beyond the Abbey, by Jeiter's Hotel (which has some celebrity in the West) we wander through Dromahair, so closely connected with the O'Rourke's. Ground between the English and their hereditary enemies in the North, the O'Rourke's at length submitted to Elizabeth, but still kept tracks of their old fire, as when after the Armada, one of them refused to surrender Spanish fugitives to Bingham; the Prince of Breffni, stated it would be inconsistent with his honour and dignity as a gentleman and a prince to give up men who had claimed the rights of hospitality. This refusal cost him his lands and eventually his life, for he was executed without the formality of a trial at Tyburn. Afterwards followed the dark days of Gaelic civilisation. Friars and chieftains alike were hunted men taking refuge in Europe, or choosing to die among their stricken people. There is a tradition that long after the Abbey was burned, the friars lived in the cottages around ministering to the people, until the last of them died. Last year Mgr. Edward O'Rourke, Bishop of the Free City of Danzig, visited the land 
of his ancestors to take part in the Thirty-first International Eucharistic Congress. The planters built their mansions on the ancient sites, and to-day Dromahair resembles rather a village in an English shire than the usual Irish community, for it has more than the usual proportion of large country houses .... But down the road comes a straggling procession of tinkers on their way to the horse fair at Manor-hamilton. One of them, an old woman, leans across the parapet to rest, and the breathless patter of her salutation thrusts its way to mingle with these memories of a part of Breffni: " That -that -charity -that -you -gev me -Mam -may -be -the -full -manes -iv gainin' -salvation -for -yerself-an' -all-belongin' -to-ye. That-it-may-loadin' (lower)-yer-pain-and-put-an-end-to-yer punishment ;-that-it-may-open-the-gates iv-Heaven-and-kunch~ ( quench)-the fires of-progity-(purgatory) . A men.'' 
Sligo Abbey
