The grey ridge, Liathdruim. How well the name reflects
the character of its landscape and its people. Slievanerin,
its great mountain barrier, solid and massive, typical of
the spirit which enabled the generations to survive fire
and sword and the withering of famine. Gone is the
panoply of Leitrim's Gaelic civilisation, the texture of
life there is restful, grey. There are no chieftains or
clansmen, just Leitrim people, mostly drawing their living from the soil, and thinking now and again perhaps of their romantic past:
Then the wet winding roads
Brown bogs and black water,
And my thoughts on white ships,
And the King of Spain's daughter.
In the south, through low rolling hills and little lakes, the Shannon winds
its way. Towards the north, Slievanerin, and beyond it the mountains
about Dromahair and Manorhamilton, dividing the county into two parts.
Like to the wars between Athens and Sparta is the occasional bickering
between North and South Leitrim, but let some unwary stranger (as did
a Local Government Inspector) propose to sunder their administrative union,
and both sections unite at once for battle. They tell him that Leitrim is
the land of Breifne, unconquered until the end of the sixteenth century,
and that no government is going to divide again its ancient territory.
" It's neither Connacht, Leinster or Ulster, I'm telling you," spoke the
turfman, on his way from the bog, " but it's a mighty good hash of the best
of them. Longford squeezes its head; Cavan tries to push it into Lough
Allen; Sligo, Fermanagh and Donegal pinch the toe it slips into the sea.
Boys, o boys, we're always battlin' in a quiet way to keep both ends up."
In most of the country districts life is still so unchanged and unspoiled
that a pilgrim to the old places could find again most of the glamour of other
days. Hilly roads, the long lime-white thatched cottages by the roadside,
the friendliness of open  doors, the hospitality of the fireside, these are things
one never forgets. The outer world seems so far away in the green peace
of these quiet townlands.
With an obstinate reverence for the past, Leitrim people are proud of
and loth to leave their simple dwellings, transferring the hearthstone of the
old house to the new when a change is necessary. Bred in their bone and
flesh is their religion, precious heritage from penal times. Its spirituality
enters into their daily thoughts, and transfigures their toil. I know an old
woman who cherishes a crudely printed picture of the Holy Family, because
it has been handed down for some generations. " Sure my grandmother
died in the bad times, and my grandfather wouldn't let her be taken away
in the coffin with the trap door that went the rounds. He took the table
and the doors of the rooms and hammered a coffin out of them here on this
floor. And that picture hanging be the dresser belonged to her. I be
talking to Them when they're all out working, and I told Them before you
strayed in that They were forgetting me, and I asking for the fair weather
until the turf was brought home. There goes the thunder again ! Jesus,
Mary, and Joseph ! watch over the men for it's famished and drowned they'll
be up there on the mountain bog." The following beautiful lines by Shane
Leslie are especially true of Leitrim :
Oh had the Lord chosen thee, O Ireland,
And led thy dreaming druids with a star,
Oh had He chosen thee to be His sireland
Thy hills would not be holier than they are.
Not holier had in Irish been the prayer
Of her, to whom Saint Gabriel was sent,
And had Saint Joseph trudged to Galway fair,
To pay the middleman his bit of rent.
The recorded glories of our past are linked with the lichened ruins of venerable
abbeys and castles, but in the narrow confines of peasant homes were played
dramas of devotion, of sacrifice and
suffering, of joy and victory that it
would be much better for us to know.
Unassertive, not very ambitious,
Leitrim might be called the Cinderella
of Connacht. It is not starred as a
tourist centre ; its beauties are ignored
in the scen c posters. It doesn't even
care whether you go there or not, but
if you do, its grip is such that it is
certain you will return.
Whirling through in a motor
car will not enable you to
taste the savour of its ways,
walking is a bit slow, and a
useful compromise between
the two is the bicycle. A
donkey and cart is too pretentiously rural, making you
an object of suspicion in the
towns, as Harold Speakman
found out when travelling in
Cavan.
Even in showery weather
the bicycle is useful, giving
an excuse for dodging in and
out of houses, caileying all
A cottage in Leitrim
the way. Everywhere is met
that gentle courtesy which is the distinguishing mark of Leitrim men and
women. Sitting by the turf fire, you share their conversation.
" When a man is ' marrid,' he takes a powerful hold on life. All work
and no play. Up in the morning at cockcrow, and working away till the
stars are nearly out," said the old philosopher, whose horse and car were
tethered to the half-door.
"That's where you score," said the vivacious bean-a-tighe, evidently a
returned American. " With that fine tum-out of yours you're able to
harness up and go into the movies in Carrick, every Saturday at least."
"Arra, you're crazy. I was never at one of them things in my life."
He nearly let his pipe go out, so stupified was he at the idea. " Them yokes
is only for the townies."
You hear how the Leitrim crickets fly out of doors during hot weather ;
that the Coolathooma band is still going strong; that times could be better
and they could be worse ; the godsend the work on the roads was to some
of the struggling farmers' sons that couldn't get to America- and then comes
a break in the clouds, and you are out on the "wet, winding road" again.
To start at the extreme south of the county you find yourself in the district
of Muintear Eoluis, which stretched up to Drumshambo, and which was former
territory of the MacRaghnaills (now Reynolds) one of whose castles was
at Dromod. Of more interest to the Dromod people is a bacon factory.
Then northwards by boglands and lakes to Mohill, which has as its patron
saint, St. Manchan, contemporary of Columcille and Adamnan.
But in early Christian times Mohill was only a part of the diocese of Fenagh,
which lies some seven miles further on ..... On the way, bringing us
back with a jerk to a more recent and still painful past, Selton Hill . . .
"Sure everyone knows it, where the Tans did bloody murder on the poor
lads. Down there in the hollow is Master Flynn's house with the plantation.
It was like this, Sean Connolly had two flying columns-one stayed at Deffier
to attack the Tans in Drumshambo, and he stayed with the lads here to
attack them in Ballinamore. Up on the hill behind you can see the ruins
of the informer's house, the man that went to Mohill to give them away.
It was burned after he was shot, and the people pulled down what was left.
On the spot you're standing, the machine guns were put and when the boys
attempted to escape, running out through the plantation below, they were
mowed down- six of them were killed and their bodies were flung in heaps
in the lories as if they were cattle."
Approaching the ancient hill of Fenagh by the Mohill road, the lake is
first seen, and above it the tall trees, a reminder of the time, up to as late
as the seventeenth century, when all this country was wooded. Beyond the
trees is Fenagh, the spot beloved of many saints and thus praised in verse
attributed to Columcille.
Dear to me that venerable town
Dear its men in orders,
Dear each stone and tree,
Dear its lake and river.
Fenagh, Home of Devotion,
An abode it is for archangels,
O Christ whom I adore
May it not be without celebration.
Two ruined churches, the remains even yet distinct, of the ancient dun of
Conaing the Fearless, whom Caillin and his monks replaced are all that is
left of tbs "home of devotion." There is another memorial- the Book
of Fenagh- a collection of sayings and wondrous stories of Caillin with a
picturesque enumeration of the tribute due to the monastery and a miscellany
of other things. The reverent hands
of the O'Rodys, hereditary coarbs of
Fenagh, kept the ancient volume
through the centuries, from at least
the tenth century, when it was probably first committed to writing, until
1516, when Tadhg O'Rody transcribed
the existing copy on clean vellum from
its decayed sheets. This last copy was
transmitted safely to the last of the
family, then Parish Priest of Kilronan,
by him to his successor in the parish,
and so on until it was printed in the
middle of the last century.
An equally wonderful memorial is
the ancient bell of St. Caillin (given 
Mr. Flynn's House
to him by St. Patrick according to tradition) and called Bell of the Kings,
because the chieftains were baptised from it. The O'Rodys also kept this,
and one of them handed it over for safe custody to the parish of Foxfield,
and it has been in the keeping of the priests of that parish to the present
day. By the courtesy of the Rev. Father Clancy, P.P., it is possible to
print a photograph of it .
A perusal of the stories in the Book and especially those about Clog na Ree,
convinces you that the scribes' zeal outran their discretion, but it is a valuable
record of tradition from which skilled antiquarians such as Dean Hynes
of Galway have detached the sub-strata of fact. Undoubtedly there lived
in this place holy men, fierce old Irish saints of tremendous austerity,
celebrated even in an age of saints. If the stranger recalls Caillin's
malediction: " I leave privilege to it, to Fenagh the Angelic. Whosoever
profanes my church shall have shortness of life and Hell. Fenagh the
Angelic, home of my bosom and my heart, " - he will approach the place
with some trepidation. There is a
rumour, however, that until the
practice was stopped, dances and
picnics were held on the very convenient platform of one of the
churches. A useful way of preventing
the place frnm such desecration would
be to post up Caillin's warning. But
among the old people reverence for
the place is still strong. As one of
them said when a comment was made
on the number of stones from the
The Bell of Fenagh 
buildings which lay around his fields :
" I wouldn't touch one of them.
Weren't they placed there by the hands of saints ? "
The very existence of Caillin is in doubt, so unsupported are the traditions
concerning him by verified historical fact, but it is only a comparatively
few centuries ago since the O'Rourkes ruled over Breifne, which comprised
all of Leitrim and parts of Cavan and Sligo. It was one of the last
considerable strongholds of Irish power, remaining unconquered until the
death of Elizabeth, and a valuable connecting link between the highlands
of Connemara and the North. But when one O'Rourke was proscribed,
made a fugitive and finally hanged as a malefactor at Tyburn because he
refused the request of the English to surrender or slay some Spanish fugitives
who had thrown themselves under his protection after the Armada, and
when his son, Brian of the Battle Axes, after an adventurous career which
is familiar, most of it spent in avenging his father's death, went down in the
general national ruin which followed the battle of Kinsale, his lands being
divided among the English adventurers, the name of an O'Rourke was
connected with the final triumph as well as the beginnings of the English
invasion. 
Caillin had prophesied that invasion would come to Ireland through the
wife of an O'Rourke, " a woman of much foulness." Indeed there was not
much romance about the elopement of these two middle-aged people, Dermot
McMurrough and Devorgilla O'Rourke, and there was still less about the
defection of the MacRaghnaills from O'Rourke, their chieftain, and their
use of the English in making war on their lord. The other sub-chiefs, the
O'Reillys, the Maglanchys, the MacDorceys, right up to Hy Murrough,
or Rossinver, the district of the O'Murroughs or O'Murreys, stood loyally
by their leader. The Reynolds identified themselves more and more with
the invaders, and a certain Sir John Reynolds was responsible for bringing
the Cromwellians into his family territory. He held high command in the
English amy, and he and Henry Cromwell, one of Oliver's sons, married
two sisters.
Around Mohill and the roads from it to Drumshambo must have ridden
many a time Turlough O'Carolan, last of the bards. In Mohill was his little
farm, and the house which he had built upon it, but most of his time he
spent travelling to and from the houses of the gentry, accompanied by his
attendant, both on horseback. Brought up as O'Carolan had been in the
MacDermott family, he adopted the viewpoint of his patrons in most things.
As a recent writer has said, his poetry " reflects amazingly little of the
bitterness which we associate with the Ireland of penal days." He was
immensely popular with prosperous English settlers, the Peytons, Squire
Jones, and the like, whose praises he sang, and this perhaps accounts for
his present-day fame, which has overshadowed the merits of the other
Gaelic poets of his district and generation like the O'Rodys, the O'Duigeannains and the Coimins.
One modern Irish novelist, the late
Donn Byrne, consciously modelled himself on O'Carolan, and found that
laudation of the dominant minority
was equally profitable. I don't think,
however, that O'Carolan would go as
far as Byrne did in making a hero
out of that cold blooded ruffian
Castlereagh. The blind bard's patrons
were the MacDermott Roes of Alderford, Keadue, who were all good
Irishmen. To one of the family (who
subsequently died of fever in 1847
brought about by his efforts on behalf
of his starving countrymen) is due the
bringing to light of the Book of
Interior of one of Fenagh's ancient churches 
Fenagh.
O' Carolan was buried in the
MacDermott Roe's family vault at
Kilronan. There is a lingering prejudice against him in this district which
is expressed in this phrase about him
which I heard from a very old man :
" Sure he was always uplaudin' the
Sassenach." One writer says of him
" he never played for hire, nor refused
a reward when offered with delicacy."
He was a friend of that sincere Irishman,
his biographer, Charles O'Conor of
Belnagare, and Oliver Goldsmith (who
had probably heard tales of him at
Lissoy) paid him this tribute : " Of all
the bards this country ever produced,
the last and greatest was O'Carolan the
Blind.”
Drumsna ! There are shining white
farmhouses along the road, and the
climbing roses are in bloom. Down
below is the Shannon, and the scented
meadowland along its banks. Once
there was bustle here, especially when 
Ruins of ancient church, Jamestown
the mail coach from Sligo halted to let
down visitors to the Spa, much celebrated among a past and goutier generation.
Around were the seats (but not the homes) of the planters, who became
absentees when they had run through the more easily exploited wealth of
their adopted country. Still sung is that pathetic ballad about a local
celebrity, the "Maid of Ballycloran." There is another commencing " In
eighteen hundred and forty-one, a corduroy breeches I first put on--"
but the teachers of Leitrim must not be anticipated in the compilation of
original material for their folklore books, so let us pass on. A grey walled
demesne and a bridge is in sight, and the road passes between a green
Gothic arch of tall and venerable trees.
The grey arch of Jamestown and its one street are in view. Sir Charles
Coote (founder of the family called with very good reason the "Bloody
Coates") had great hopes for this place when he selected and fortified it
in 1623. It was to be another Londonderry, a refuge for the planters from
the "Tories," the dispossessed Irish Catholic gentry. But time after time
the place was taken and retaken by the Irish outlaws, who were thus
described by Ormonde in 1657 : "The little rebels known here by the name
of Tories do grow as fast as they are cut off, and have rendered the whole
county useless to the King, and uninhabitable by any English."
With Ballintogher and Collooney, this was one of the chain of important
strongholds of the English adventurers.
when they gained a successful foothold
for the first time in the territory of
the O'Rourkes. Jamestown had a
Corporation of twelve burgesses, a town
clerk, a coroner (useful official for the
times), and a sergeant with mace.
Even yet the village manages to get
a place in the limelight. Every old
bridge and derelict building for thirty
miles around flaunts the slogan :
"Jamestown Hall is Boycotted. Up
Sean O'Farrell." And there was the local candidate for the County Council
whose ambition it was to " erect a peppermint factory in Jamestown."
From the top of this gateway (castellated by Francis O'Beirne, one of
whose descendants was Col. Hugh O'Beirne, military secretary to Kitchener,
and who went down with his chief in the " Hampshire ") there is a view
of one of the most picturesque little graveyards in Ireland, stretching from
the village street to the Shannon, and thick with tall venerable yews. In
it are the remains of a small Franciscan church which has a place in Irish
history, for there on the 6th of August, 1650, assembled the Archbishops
of Armagh and Tuam, with all available bishops and abbots of Ireland,
to issue the last proclamation on the subject of the Catholic Confederacy.
Across the Shannon is a convent of Franciscan nuns, the Order having
recently come to the vicinity. The sight of these two foundations, one
in ruins, the other flourishing, recalls many memories of the penal times
when wandering Franciscan friars and secular priests kept the sacred flame
of religion and culture alight despite the merciless harrying of the Cootes,
the "Black Harrisons," the" Hungry Hamiltons," the" Skelping Lawders'
and the rest of them. Here I may be forgiven for quoting in extenso a ·
proclamation which is a roll of honour, a forgotten roll on a dusty shelf,
of all those brave and forgotten heroes :
"At a Special Sessions of the Peace held for the County Leitrim at Carrick Drumrusk
the 27th day of July, 1714.
Whereas Grand Jury then and there
impanelled and sworn present that Bryan
Egan and Denis Connan both registered
priests of the Roman Religion in the Parish
of Kiltoghork (Kiltoghert) and that
Laurence Keon a popish priest registered
for tte parish of Killinurnery now removed
to U_e upper end of Kiltoghork (Drumshambo) parish and that Bryan Donagher
registered popish priest but not for any
parish goes by the name of Dr. Donagher
deemed to be Moderator over the popish 
Church ruins and district of Fenagh
clergy in the doceses of Killmore and Ardagh and that Peter Duignan a registered
popish priest in the parish of Annaghduff and that Dominick McGany a registered
. popish priest in the parish of Annaghduff has removed himself in to the parish of
Mohill and that Owen McHugh a registered popish priest in the parish of Mohill and
that Connor McLoughlin a popish priest registered for the parish of Cloonclare has
since, removed himself to the parish of Oughteragh and that Philip Reyley a
registered popish priest for the parish of Carrigallen and that Thomas Brady a
registered popish priest for the parish of Drumreilly and that Felix McKeone a
registered popish priest for the ' parish of Kiltubrid and that Dermot fflannan a
registered popi~h priest for the parish of Cloone and that Denis Gaffney and
Hugh Cannon both registered popish priests for the parish of Cloone and that ffrancis
Moran a ffranciscan fryer in the parish of Cloone and Mohill and that Peter
Reynolds a ffranciscan ffryer in and about the parish of Mohill and that Oughy
Duigenan a ffranciscan fryer in the parishes of ffenagh and Kiltubret and that
Owen O'Rorke alias Donell alias Robin the Juggler a ffranciscan ffryer in the parish
of Oughteragh and Drumreilly and that Miles Keene a ffranciscan fryer in the
parish of Annaghduff and that Cormac Shanley a ffranciscan fryer in the parish
of Oughteragh and that ffarrell Rodaghan a ffranciscan fryer in the parish of
ffeenagh and that another Rodaghan a young priest newly ordained whose christian
name they know not that frequents the parish of ffeenagh and that James
McTernan a young priest lately ordained in and about the parish of Cloone, do
all frequently say Mass and have not taken the oath, and that James -McHµgh- a
pop~sh schoolmaster keeps school at Kesheary in the parish of _Kiltubrid and that
Robert Molloy a papist teaches school in the parish of Drumshamboe and one Edward
Nagle a papist teaches school in Castlefore in ffeenagh parish and that one Richard
fflanagan a papist keeps school in the parish of Drumreilly all which popish schoolmasters have not taken the oath of abjuration as · by law required and that · one
Gerald Cullen a ffranciscan ffryer exercises his ffryers function in and about the
County of Leitrim and that one Patrick fflynn of Mqhill is a young popish priest
not registered and celebrates Mass in the parish of Mohill and that one ffrancis
Keane a young popish priest in the parish of Kiltubfid is not registered and says
Mass in the said parish and that one John Duigenan a · young priest not registered
frequently celebrates Mass in the parish of ffeenagh and that one Bernard Rodaghan
a young priest lately ordained says Mass in the parish of ffeenagh and elsewhere,
all which said priests and ffryers doe frequently say Mass and exercise their priestly
functions not having taken the oath of abjuration but act in public defyance and
contempt of the laws of this Kingdom. These are therefore in her Majesty's name
requiring you and every of you on .sight hereof to apprehend the bodyes of all the
before mentioned and them or any of them so apprehended to bring before some
of her Majesties Justices of the Peace to be dealt with according to law."
You will have noticed the occurrence of the name of O'Rourke in the
above, and to the list may be added the honoured name of Dr. Thaddeus
O'Rourke, a Franciscan, and Bishop of Killala from 1707 to his death in
1734. On Dr. O'Rourke's arrival in his diocese an account relates of him
that "he was dogged as a popish spy; obliged to change his name to that
of Fitzgerald, to skulk some years in the bogs of the Joyce country, and
finally to abscond among his relatives in the house of Belnagare." La tin,
Greek and philosophy, and the other elements of ecclesiastical education,
were taught in the proscribed schools, and in addition the literature of
Gaelic Ireland, preserved in precious manuscript and pored over by such
brilliant scholars as Charles O'Conor, Bishop O'Rourke's kinsman. And
such teaching was a highly dangerous occupation as the following extract
from a penal law of the times will show :
"Whatever person of the popish religion shall publicly teach school or instruct
youth in learning in any private house in this realm, or be entertained to instruct
youth by any Protestant schoolmaster, he shall be esteemed a popish regular
clergyman and persecuted as such."
Enough has been quoted to show that the hidden Ireland beyond the
ken of the squireens was one in which real learning and scholarship flourished,
some of its products achieving abroad the recognition they merited, but
Creevelea Abbey, Dromahair
the greater number remaining in Ireland with their people. As a kind of
pendant I finish my quotations with this one from the Royal Dublin Society's
patronising survey of Leitrim in 1803 :
"The state of education amounts to this and no more that I believe it may be
said without exception that every father in the county sends his children to a
neighbouring school where they learn to scrawl a little writing, to read as they are
taught and some of the rules of arithmetic. Some make considerable proficiency in
these branches and turn out smart pedlars, shopkeepers and dealers. They are some
of them now in Dublin who have realised considerable properties.
"The use of the English language is quite general in this county. Very few of
the old people who do not speak it. The children are all sent to school and any of
them addressed in Irish will always answer in English."
To complete the picture, the seventeenth century saw another weapon
introduced, that of famine, as an agent of extermination. In 1607 the Lord
Deputy writes :
"I have said and written it is famine that must consume the Irish as our swords
and other endeavours worked not that speedy effect which is expected. Hunger
would be a better because a speedier weapon to employ against them than the
sword."
Maltby, President of Connaught reports : " I burnt all their com and houses
and put to the sword all that could be found." Not even a child "were it
only a hand high " was spared. An experienced soldier in this warfare,
one who already had cut down with scythes and sickles the growing com
in Co. Wicklow, came from the east, by name Col. Hewson.
And here beside us in Jamestown are the ruins of an old mill with which
is connected memories of the devastation of the famine in 1847. In this
building was milled a great quantity of flour, but the people laid siege to
it in 1847, and the manager cleared out. Many years ago two old ladies
from South Africa, daughters of this man, revisited the place.
The story of this disaster is familiar, and to give an idea of its effects,
of the starvation which was allowed to happen in a year when the value
of the country's produce amounted to forty-five millions of pounds, a
quotation from a letter of the 19th May, 1847, from Dr. O'Higgins, Bishop
of Ardagh, will suffice:
"Persons of twenty years appear to be bending in old age, and in many instances
are become shameless and idiotic from want of every kind. In some instances
particularly in Leitrim, whole families are discovered to be dead in their cabins by
the stench that proceeds from their putrid bodies. The dead are frequently buried
in bogs, cabbage plots and even in the houses where they die ! The most part of
the land of Leitrim will be untilled this year, and the Catholics will I fear before
long have nearly all disappeared from death or emigration."
From Jamestown the main road runs direct to Carrick-on-Shannon, the
county town two miles distant. Quiet, restful little roads, full of green
shade lead away invitingly to places with such lovely names as Coreen,
Keenaghan, Rhincurreen, Ballinacleigh and Attyrory, but Carrick will
wait no longer.
On a hill overlooking the river the
dignified and impressive buildings of
the Marist Convent dominate the town.
Hundreds of primary teachers throughout Ireland have a fond place in their
hearts for this, their Alma Mater, and
for Mother Laurence, one of the
most successful educationalists in the
Marist Convent, Carrick-On-Shannon.
New Chapel 
country. The fame of this convent and its teacher was such that until
the recent addition to the boarding school, large numbers of pupils had to
be refused.
The nuns came to the town in 1873, and moved into their beautiful convent,
Mount St. Joseph, in 1891. In addition to their work as primary and
secondary teachers they took charge of the nursing of the sick poor until
the local authorities took over the Union hospital. Mother Laurence
celebrated her golden jubilee last September, and the occasion is my excuse
for ignoring her dislike to publicity in any form. She is happy in this sunset
of her years in seeing the culmination of her labour in the erection of the
beautiful new chapel on the Mount.
Carrick Drumruske, as it was
formerly called, was created by
James I, and as a town returning
two members to Parliament, it was
a valuable source of patronage to the
first Earl of Leitrim, Robert Clements.
As compensation at the Act of Union,
he was awarded £15,000. A statue
of one Nathaniel, Viscount Clements,
occupied a place of honour in the
courthouse, but some over zealous
Black and Tans, mistaking it for one
of a rebel Irish chieftain, pulled it off
the pedestal, and battered it about in
a most undignified manner. In 1878,
during his eviction campaign, an Earl
of Leitrim was shot dead. He is
buried in the vaults of St. Michan's
in Dublin. A gory ballad, still
popular locally, recalls the deed :
It was on the rise they did behold
Three lifeless on the spot,
And the word went far and near,
Lord Leitrim he was shot.
It was going around by Cratloe Wood 
He met his sad downfall ;
It was there he met bold Rory,
On the hills of Donegal. 
Mother M. Laurence 
The jail and the workhouse in the town, the English versions of the old
Irish houses of hospitality, were built on an especially massive scale. The
beautiful Church of St. Mary is approached by a very dignified and imposing
entrance from the main street, and the solid looking buildings around are
evidence of the prosperity which was once there. In the name " Leitrim
Scutchers," now used in derision, is a tradition of a linen industry which
bas vanished. The legalised brigandage of absentee landlords has contributed its quota to the decay.
By a little row of quaint thatched
cottages the street meanders to
Gallows Hill, (where the Yeos did
their whippings and hangings in '98)
which Susan Mitchell, who spent her
childhood there, has made the subject
of one of her poems.
Leaving the county town by a long
grey road, the little village of Leitrim,
lying in a tree-shaded hollow, comes into view. The county derives its
name from this place, and the reason is not far to seek. A castle was erected
there by the Lord of Breifne, Brian Ballach O'Rourke, in 1540, but was
battered down by their opponents the MacRaghnaills. One of the
descendants of this same Brian fought with the Confederates in 1641, and
another with Sarsfield, and a local historian, Mr. J. J. Mahon (to whom
I am indebted for some of the facts in this article) has traced subsequent
descendants in a direct line down the generations to a Volunteer Captain
who, on the night of Easter Eve, 1920, attacked, dynamited and burned
the police barracks which stood on the site of his ancestor's castle of Leitrim.
Within sight of Leitrim is the famous height of Sheemore, the lawful prey
of many balladmongers, and also the scene of a determined battle during
the War of Independence, 1920-1. A body of military had raided Gowel
Church in the hope of picking up any lads who were attending to their religious
duties, and were intercepted on their return on the north side of Sheemore.
The Volunteers fought and won.
The country is particularly bare on the road to Drumshambo, a striking
contrast to the time, up as far as late in the seventeenth century when " you
could travel to Drumkeerin by the branches of the trees." This stripping
of verdure was done by the planters, who recklessly exploited the easily
obtained wood for smelting the iron ore quarried from the slopes of
Slievanerin. It was also quarried at Drumsna, at Barnameena, at
Drumshambo and Ballinamore, and subsequently at Arigna in Co.
Roscommon, just over the border. No trees were planted in their place,
arid by the end of the eighteenth century the country assumed its present
appearance.
From very ancient times, particularly in the valley of Glangevlen, now
in Cavan, on the other side of the mountain, smiths were reputed to have
worked the easily obtained metal. Before leaving Glangevlen (so useful
to the O'Rourkes in time of stress as a hiding place for their women and
household gear) another peculiarity of this still Irish-speaking place is worthy
of mention: its cows. In legendary times one celebrated animal provided
milk for " three-fourths of the people of Ireland,'' and in later and more
sophisticated times its kine are still famous. Strangers are warned not to leave
bicycles within reach of their jaws. One informant told me they had eaten
a brass band not long ago. And there is the perfectly true story of an
eyewitness about a party of Black and Tans who arrived in a motor lorry,
and went into a publichouse to drink. Presently arrived a herd of these
nationally minded cows who made short work of the vehicle, and the sight
of the grisly skeleton nearly provoked the raiders to mass homicide.
The town of Drumshambo, with its almost mountainous streets, is in a
picturesque situation before Lough Allen, and with its girdle of fine trees
is most pleasing to the eye. In this town is a Franciscan Convent, a place
of pilgrimage for thousands of county folk during the Portiuncula. For
those who are interested in the history and work of these nuns, I would
refer them to Mrs. Concannon's valuable book on the subject.
The road towards Drumkeerin as it rises over the lake presents a series
of changing vistas. Woods stretch down to the shore, and through the
branches are seen numerous islets, some of them evidently old burial grounds.
On each side of the lake rise the mountains, and the ever changing aspect
of the great mirror of water, whether sparkling in the sunshine or brooding
and sorrowful as the storm clouds thicken and gather, whipping the darkened
waters with white flecks of foam, almost compels loitering by the way.
Once you are on a bicycle, and cycling up and down hill in the cool of the
evening, motion becomes almost a necessity, and the ear alone has leisure
to listen to the sound of torrents grown into a sullen roar as they deepen
with the rain, and dash through deep woods and still deeper glens into the
lake below. On the other side of the lake the road is equally lovely. Passing
by busy farmhouses, one catches the cheerful sound of country work, calves
rushing greedily to the pails all unaware of the fate which the bounty stretches
over their hapless heads.
Above the town of Drumkeerin, and looking back over all the scene of
so much human effort, the mountain of Slievanerin cultivated inconceivably
far up its inhospitable slopes, the pitifully small farms met with on this
road, make one reflect on the very much needed prosperity which the new
mineral development schemes will bring into this countryside. There will
be no occasion for that emigration to
America, Scotland and England, that
barren trade in human flesh which
has hitherto been this district's main
contribution to our exports. And I
do not think we will allow unchecked
capitalistic exploitation such as that
which turned equally beautiful rural
scenes elsewhere into unlovely blots
on the landscape.
And so to Dromahair, and the
district of which I wrote in last year's
Pedalling out from Dromahair
towards Manorhamilton, there is one difference between North and South
Leitrim which makes itself unpleasantly felt, the condition of the roads.
Rough though the going is, one is amply compensated by glimpses of wild
mountain scenery, and besides this road has another interest. On the fateful
days of the 5th and 6th September, 1798, General Humbert led his
column via Ballintogher and Dromahair to Manorhamilton, where he was
to make one of those decisions which are the turning points of history.
You may remember he had beaten off at Collooney the only courageous
attack ever made upon him, that of Colonel Vereker, and with the intention
of reaching the safety of the Northern hills, he made a very rapid march
on Manorhamilton. There at noon on the 6th he received word of an
outbreak which was being prepared in Longford, and weighing the chances
of waging guerilla warfare in the mountains, or making for Granard and
afterwards his principal objective,
Dublin, he took the latter. Lecky
thinks that he had a big chance of
success in the North, where he might
have reached Lough Swilly and made
contact with Bompard's squadron and
Wolfe Tone.
The rest of the story is familiar. He
turned, and rested for the night at
Drumkeerin, where willing hands
brought refreshments to his desperately
tired handful of men. On the morning
of the 7th he moved by Ballintra (half
destroying the bridge), General Lake
close on his rearguard, and arrived at
Cloone at 6p.m. He wished to move
on further himself, and indeed another

Birthplace of Sean Mac Diarmuda
Surviving Relatives

four miles would have brought him outside the cordon which was being
woven around him, but his men were incapable of marching another step;
they rested and were surrounded. In the fight at Ballinamuck on the 8th,
three hundred of the United Irishmen fought with him, and all these, wounded
or living, were massacred afterwards by the English troops. Humbert
himself and the French troops were of course spared for fear of reprisals.
The mountains close in on the pass, and on the left is the grim peak of
Benbow in which according to tradition there is treasure, in a lake on the
summit, guarded by an immense cat.... Manorhamilton, a bright town, in
no wise haunted by the grim memories of Sir Frederick Hamilton, and his
floggings and burnings. This was rather a lair of banditti than a peaceful
town, and his mobs of ruffians plundered large tracts of Leitrim and Longford
and murdered the inhabitants. The most acceptable presents they could
offer him were the heads of the wretched people. He had a gallows erected
in front of his castle (the ruins of which still stand), and it had a fresh
occupant each day. His name was execrated, and as O'Donovan writes,
he is reputed to have died of a lingering and terrible disease, almost fit
punishment for his crimes.
Here also is a first reminder of the border in the shape of a Customs station,
for the road from here to Enniskillen is one of the approved roads for inter- ·
state traffic. A traveller along roads such as these on the Free State side, will
observe how in villages like Kiltyclogher the roads from the North leading in to
Free State centres of trade are closed. He will realise the artificiality of
the border. Whether true or not it is alleged that the canny Northerns
saw to it that all the profitable avenues of commerce were approved which
led to their border towns, and all the others closed, thus wiping the eye of
the tolerance proving South.
The bleak mountains of Fermanagh
look very dour from here, but there was
one to whom they were very dear, when
Ireland had no frontier but the sea ...
To reach his mountain home it is necessary to climb up again from Kiltyclogher
a real mountain road which is within a
few hundred yards of the border. To
the left is soon seen the little white
cottage where Sean MacDiarmuda was
born and reared. In his last moments
in the cell at Kilmainham his thoughts
dwelt among these little green fields,
as one realises when reading that calm 
Rossinver, Lough Melvin in the Distance Mother M. Aloysius and Sister M. Patrick on proposed site of a new Franciscan Convent

and joyful last letter of his, and his 
many affectionate messages to all his friends around. He had filled two
pages with close writing, and as a final postscript up in the corner yet another
group of names, one last flash of memory on the loved scenes and people
before he faces, unshaken, the paling sky and the levelled rifles. ... Here is
one Leitrim man in whom the many streams of the history of his county
have united; the proscribed leaders, the hunted rapparees to whom these
hills were refuge have their representative in this century in a quiet dark-haired man, one of the seven who dared an empire.... His friends in the
district of Kiltyclogher are about to collect funds for a memorial to him.
It is a step which long ago should have been taken; and planned as it will
be by those who were reared in the same environment and think the same
thoughts as he did, it will be surely one he would have liked himself.
Out again on the road towards Rossinver, and here I met with two
Franciscan nuns, Sisters of the Atonement, who had arrived a few days
before from America to found their first novitiate in Ireland. They came,
as Mother Aloysius related, with nothing but their "grips," but already 
they have turned their temporarily ~
rented cottage in to a real religious
house of the kind St. Francis himself
would have loved. A bare room for
an oratory, a white cloth on an
improvised table, some holy pictures
they had found, the flowers from the
fields. Sister Mary Patrick is very
proud of the tables and writing desk
she has made out of boxes. She had
been praying hard for eight years that
she might be sent to Ireland, and her
enthusiasm is refreshing. Mother Aloysius smilingly admitted to doing
this kind of pioneering work before. She shows the site on which they had
planned to build. It will be in an impressive situation, with hills to the
right and left, and before them the ruins of St. Mogue's church and the
waters of Lough Melvin, and on the skyline the blue mountains of Donegal.
I find that Mr. Meehan, their caretaker, is possibly an authentic descendant
of the ancient coarbs of St. Molaise. To show the antiquity of their line
one reference will suffice. The Annals of the Four Masters record that in
1439 died O'Meehan, Herenach of Ballymeehan, and Coarb of St. Molaise.
Mr. Meehan related a piece of family -history that was new to me. One
of the line went on a pilgrimage to Rome, arriving so wild, tattered and
strange looking that the " cardinals and the archbishops" doubted he was
a priest. To test him they excised the Gospel of the day from the Mass
Book, and when he noticed nothing, they taxed him with his ignorance.
He declared that the Gospel was there, and on examination they found it
miraculously restored. This book was kept as a heirloom in the family
in a special shrine, but Mr. Meehan's grandfather was forced to part with
it to the landlord, and it is now in Trinity College.
Leitrim is hard to forget: the "blue-hazed, cradled mountains," the
little lakes of grey-blue water, the sleepy, twilight villages and the restful
hills. One can well understand the yearnings of the exiles who have made
their homes far from the quiet places they loved.
Here is an extract from an American letter to the editor of THE
CAPUCHIN ANNUAL:
"All that remains of my own beloved home are the four bare walls that in the
past sheltered a loving family. The battering ram and the blazing thatch made
us exiles. I have taught my children to love Ireland and my own County Leitrim
where my heart is always.."
The exiles never forget. 
