I lounge on O'Connell Bridge, killing the time that's left before meeting two friends. With my back against the parapet, I gape across the traffic, downriver, eastward. This place where a sequence of streets bridge the Liffey, is the cross of the newer city. Behind me, on its hill crowned by squat, peaked Christ Church, is the old city, the origin itself, as old as the northern men of the harsh, valiant sagas. Of that ancient origin nothing certain remains bar a few rusty swords, an armful of poor bones that the builder's spade turned up, names, and maybe, this Dublin. And at this Dublin I can only stare, and wonder if it has any one soul at all and whether any man, a poet cracked with the whirling nebula of a great poem, will ever fill the city into words. No man, I decide, ever filled words with the fulness of Dublin. Books have been written, of course, arm-wearying volumes, pamphlets, pages dense with facts, autobiographies that are witty and savage, laments that are sad with the smokeless smouldering to decay of the foreign lords' mansions, but the historians and the penmen must have known the failure that I now know. Dublin filtered through their words as it filters through mine. Yet, at least I can tell why they failed and why I fail. The native force that would assemble the facts, those diverse, chaotic, intimidating mobs of facts, is lacking. You could if you pleased give those facts a wilful unity by writing from the point of view of geography or architecture or archaeology, but you'd be choosing an aspect only. The city, whole, living, full, would still be as far from you as the world's end. You wouldn't possess the spirit of the city. You couldn't. There's no one spirit. There are many. Near me a man is resting his elbows on the parapet. Up the river he's gazing with wintry eyes. He needs a shave, clothes that don't yawn asunder and boots that come between the foot and the ground. He's part of the civic picture. Two men pass, talking Irish about nothing, loudly in the new tradition as if they'd been taught to use their throats by Feoil Bo of Dun Caoin who could deafen three parishes (a mighty man), and between the two men is a girl, dark, very lovely, but dazed-looking and neglected. The cars slide past, stop, and jerk on again. I recognise a few occupants. Two of them are business men who think that they own the new Ireland, and God give them sense. A man I know dodges a few cars and jumps aboard a tram and I can guess where he's going. He's a Vincent de Paul brother. There was one old woman whom he visited regularly during the last six months of her life, and she lay in rags and sacking in her room, her only room, while one of her legs rotted away and the vermin multiplied on the ceiling and walls and the flies rose and settled in swarms. He does visits nearly every second evening of his life and I don't know any man so gay. A sea bird swoops at the wall and the raggedy man is casting his bread on the waters. The dome of the Custom House, lifting itself above the red iron railway bridge that destroys full vision of the building and the sea-finding river, is almost white in the sunlight of the evening. The dome calls up the society which produced it, that gentry of the wine-coloured brick houses and the spacious squares. In early summer, some of the squares that I know are filled all round by their railings with the white and pink blossoms of hawthorn, and with lilac, and the down-pouring gold of laburnum, and when the air is very quiet in the evening after light rain, the scent rises thick. As I recall things, I begin to play a game in my imagination with the centuries. From where I stand I can see buildings or monuments that will serve as symbols of the eleven or twelve centuries of civic growth. Oratorical O'Connell surmounts his troupe of bullet-marked angels and his coat is buttoned on the wrong side, for sculptors are not necessarily tailors. He will do for the last century. He bawled a rabble into nationhood and he was a Lord Mayor of the City. For the eighteenth century the Custom House stands, at which no man can look (after he has walked away down the quays past the iron railway bridge across which the devil will come into Dublin on the Last Day) and not see the harmony and be soothed. For the seventeenth century I find it hard to think of any right symbol for the moment, and marking time, I watch the seabirds. Then I recall that seabirds, during the last days of the year 1641, came flocking by night over the City and the Castle, and that they wouldn't end a dreadful crying although guns were shot off to disperse them, till the citizens were out of their minds with terror, thinking that the birds foretold the onrush of exasperated, insurgent Ireland. But the birds aren't a good symbol. Then I discover the obvious symbol before me ; the Port of Dublin. For it was during the seventeenth century that men sank walls, channelled the river, reclaimed mud and sand and shielded shipping from the elements. It is a man-made port and men made well. For the age of Elizabeth and the Tudors, there on my left is Trinity College. To find a mark of the more ancient times, I have to turn about, and what I wish to see as a sign of the old English I cannot see at all. It's Winetavern Street, that keeps its poem of a name in spite of porter-drinking. I look higher, up to the peaked tower of Christ's Church behind which the sky has been lit into faint blue silk by the evening. The tower is sharp, edged. For me it is the Normans, and beyond the Normans, the Danes who made Dublin. My imaginative game with the centuries is almost played out. I look at that Church on its hill and I think of the City that goes out distantly from it on all sides, and the City shrinks in my mind as history goes backward, villages are left isolated like sandbanks after an ebbtide, and then the villages disappear, and I see woods, and between the woods and the straggling river the marshlands where the seabirds hold their own, and only a few fishermen, their huts near the ford of the hurdles, to disturb the desolation. 
My two friends came at last. As they stand together, (Jer, spare, natty in dress and very mobile of feature, Denis stout, devil-may-care about all the things of this world, solid as a rock) I remark to myself that they're similar only in that they're both sucking pipes. They're of Dublin, these two men. Dublinmen I'd call them if I were sure that an attempt to trace their families farther back than one generation wouldn't lead me out to their native farms. Jer's near relations are farmers. Denis remembers well a Tipperary farmhouse where he used listen, when he was a young lad, to an old man translating the plays of Aristophanes at sight. But Dublin is in their blood. We cross Butt Bridge and turn down the straight broad run of Rogerson's Quay. The work of human hands which dominates all this neighbourhood, and even all Dublin as you see it from the southern hills, is not the Custom House, nor a church spire, nor the firm poised lines of dockside machinery, but something stolid, very high, steel-grey and most unlovely : a gasometer. Denis removes his pipe, glances up, mutters one word, and smokes on again. Then he and Jer begin an argument, in which I can't join for I'm neither a Dubliner nor of Dublin, about the whereabouts of a sailors' pub where, in the old days, drinks from all the corners of the earth could be found. It's not easy to find houses on this long quay, for there are many blank walls, featureless storesheds, and ruined offices with the grass growing on their windowsills. Beside tarpaulin-covered mountains of sacks and packing cases, there are groups of men chatting, or playing cards with intent eyes and hands. A few children-chislers, as they call them-are playing a game around the foot of a crane. The sight of them draws a story from Jer. A chisler fell in to the Liffey once upon a time. One of those aimless dockside characters who'd have the perfect retort ready while your master of repartee would be wondering what it was all about, flung off his relics of a suit. Just as he was balancing himself for a header into the Liffey, up runs another chisler, saying, Mister, mind your clothes, mister. And the answer, They're old enough to take care of themselves. Jer is off. He gives the one about the woman who ran up to the priest on the church steps: Beg your pardon, Father, but did e'er a young fella come up from James's Street this mornin' to be buried. And he follows up with the Dublin woman's recommendation of a certain brand of tea : It's gorgeous tea. It takes a powerful grip on the second water. We walk on, and the warehouses come to an end so that we get an unhindered view right out to sea. The two lighthouses, the North Bull, and the Poolbeg for which we're making, show white light and red, for there's a greyish furry mist across the mouth of the bay. The surface of the water is skin-tight, and very dull save where there's a reflection of a broad faced moon, low to the earth, toned to a deep copper by the mist. There's no wind. Seabirds perch meditatively and hardly cry at all. The wrangle of the streets behind us is a little thing. Near us and before us the fresh water and the salt, two origins of the City, silently mingle in conflict, and the ever-conquering sea, rhythmically asserting its ever-present authority, possesses as its own the river that knows on its liberally curving course the foulness of towns, the woods and spacious grass of the plains of Dublin and Kildare, the flash and fall from the Wicklow heights, and the lonesomeness of faraway hills. 
As elemental as that two-fold origin was the Scandinavian beginning of the City. With their flat-bottomed boats the men from the sea easily navigated the shallows and the bars, rowed up between sandbanks and mudflats to a dark muddy pool, the dubh-linn, and on the left, a contrast to the wooded plain round about, was a hill. On the hill they raised timber houses. That was Dublin. From that hill they went out and made themselves a tiny compact kingdom, north as far as Skerries, south to Arklow, inland as far as Leixlip, and on the Irish coast they scattered a few trading towns like Waterford, Wexford, Limerick and the like. For they were not completely piratical, murderous, and destructive. They traded in skins, timber, metals, grain and women. Their beer is legendary even to this day in Irish folk-tales, a beer that was made, they say, from heather, by a secret way that's lost. The loose world to which they belonged, (loose, I mean, in political unity), stretched from Iceland to the Seine, and from Dublin to the White Sea. In Ireland, by the middle of the ninth century, they had settled their own differences in Dublin by their favourite method: the sword. Olaf the White, son of Inguald, King of the Uplands, came to Ireland, and all the foreigners, Dubh-gaill and Fionn-ghaill, submitted to him, and he was King of Dublin and of Fingal. Fighting with the Irish went on till the beginning of the tenth century when the Norse of Dublin made their kingdom secure for a long period by defeating the Irish at the battle of Kilmashogue. Then, instead of fighting, they intermarried, with the Irish, which was sometimes almost as bad if not worse, for they intermarried with more genealogical complexity than respect for the laws of God and man. Amongst them as they live in their sagas, stories that are an everlasting legacy, you're in a weird world: curses that are terribly effectual, venomous wives, bloodmad killers, voyages across empty stormy seas, trading, feuds lasting on from generation to generation. Their paganism was a raw thing, mostly of the appetites, with little of the grace or reason that can still make you regret the Hellenic Mediterranean. They boasted of bodily might, adored physical strength, cunning, praised the spirit of revenge. Even when they became Christians they were still terrible; their convert fighting-men going out with the Cross in one hand and the sword or axe in the other. Death in battle, among the corpses of their enemies, they preferred to any other kind of death, and they liked to die taunting their conquerors or singing a song of their heroes. There was a great childishness in them. They were always watching for omens. During the weeks before the battle of Clontarf, while fleets were crowding in towards Dublin from the Orkneys, the Hebrides, Scotland, Man, and England, to crush Brian the Christian King whom they hated but yet respected, they saw omens in sea and sky, such as you may read in the saga of Burnt Njal : blood in the air and on the altar, and the flapping of raven wings. The battle was doom. By right I should put down all that I know to be in books about those men from the sea, about their religion of war and thunder, their ships, weapons and piracies, but especially about what's said to be one of their living signs in Dublin to-day : white-haired, light-blue-eyed citizens; and about this heritage I'd write, with technical terms and millimetric measurements, if I believed in it, which I do not, for there seems to be a bog under this kind of reasoning, just as there's a bog under the older City, thirty feet thick, for example, under Fishamble Street : All Scandinavians have blue eyes and white hair. There are people in Dublin with blue eyes and white hair. Therefore . But here is a story. 
Once upon a time, Hoskulld, a great grandson of Olaf the White, King of Dublin, went from Iceland to the Brenneyar Islands where King Hakon lived who had convened the Thing. There was drinking and feasting, trading, and the settling of quarrels and of the powers of rulers. There were slaves for sale. Hoskulld wanted a female slave. And there was a certain slave-merchant named Gille, who wore a Russian hat and was therefore wealthy, and Hoskulld went to that man's tent. Behind the curtain were twelve young girls. For the twelfth girl who was very beautiful, Hoskulld paid three marks of silver weighed on a scales. She would be of service to his wife in his house in Iceland. She didn't speak, for it was remarked that she was dumb. He brought her home and she lived in the house as a handmaid for his wife, and she gave birth to a son. The son was called Olaf. One day, Hoskulld came into his house and heard the girl speaking to the child. He questioned her about her dumbness. Truthfully she told him that she never had been dumb but only ashamed, and that besides she was the daughter of Miarkartan (Muircheartach), King of Ireland, and that her name was Melkorka (Maelcorca), and that she had been captive to the foreigners since she was fifteen. Now Hoskulld's wife was a jealous woman and when she heard the story, she quarrelled with the handmaid and beat her till the master was forced to keep them apart and to build a separate residence. As young Olaf grew to manhood, his mother was tormented by the desire of his visiting Ireland and the people to whom she was kin. She begged Hoskulld to fit him for the voyage, but Hoskulld refused. Secretly, she married a man on the bargain that he would build a boat, give it a crew and food. This was done. And Olaf, eighteen years of age, sailed for Norway. The King, Harold Groefeld, and the Queen, Gunhild, gladly received him and he was given a vessel like a ship, with a crew of sixty men, for the voyage to Ireland. They set sail. As they came near the end of their journey, a mighty storm arose, and they lost their direction. At last, after wandering on the sea, they came in upon a long flat shore where they anchored in the full tide. Weary they lay there and the tide ebbed and men came wading out from the sands the waters not reaching the girdle of the tallest. They spoke. Olaf heard the tongue his mother had given him from the cradle. The men laid hands on the boat, saying that it was theirs, because it was beached and, according to their laws, a wreck. Olaf answered and said that the story might be so if there was no man on board to speak their tongue, and that himself and his crew were ready to defend their ship. They fell to fighting. They gripped their swords and axes and put shields on the bulwarks. Olaf stood in the prow, and he had a golden helmet on his head, a spear in his hand, and his breast was covered by a shield on which a lion was emblazoned. While they were waiting for battle, other men gathered on the shore. There was a show of peace. Olaf was called upon and told that the King was there and he was commanded to go in on the sands. He went and said that he was only defending the ship which was his. Now, Olaf wore a ring. The King saw it and said it was, the ring of his own daughter, and in a little while he knew that Olaf was his grandson. Afterwards they wanted to make Olaf the king of Dublin. The ship was drawn on the beach and the voyage was ended, and so my story. 
They were masters of the City far into the twelfth century, but already they knew how William of Normandy had gripped England and how the new kings of that country would sooner or later attempt Ireland. Saga-like, they lost their mastery of three hundred years. It was Asgall Mac Torcaill who manned the walls of the City when Diarmuid Mac Murchadha led Earl Strongbow, Raymond, Milo de Cogan, Fitzstephen and Fitzgerald, up through the heights of Wicklow on a calm September day, across the plain of Dublin to the unguarded south wall where the Castle hill sloped down to a glen called the Cum. The little force of those foreigners, who had made of war the art that brought them roaring to the gates of captive Jerusalem, was thrust in between the army of the Irish King, Ó Conchubhair, and the western wall, so that they hemmed in the City on all sides, save along the river. The Archbishop, the saint of Dublin, Laurence O'Toole, (also patron of a Dublin football team that once jarred every tooth in my head) went out to make peace. While there was still talk of peace, Milo de Cogan, Maurice and Raymond, set fire to the walls, rushed, and took the City. It was St. Matthew's Day, September 21st, 1170. Vowing a deep vow that he would return, Asgall Mac Torcaill escaped by the sea. A year later, with Diarmuid dead, Leinster was in revolt. The saint called on the King, Ruaidhri Ó Conchubhair, to march on Dublin. Asgall enlisted Vikings from Man and the Hebrides. The sweep of the saga of Asgall was beginning. During midsummer, Strongbow and his men were cooped up in the City by the King's army that sprawled from Clontarf to Kilmainham. September came again. The Normans were desperate. Six hundred men, with de Cogan, Raymond and Maurice to lead them, and some Irish ceithirn, rode over Ostman's bridge, swept around by Finglas, and 
Thirty-First International Eucharistic Congress, Dublin, 1932. 
Procession of The Most Blessed Sacrament To O'Connell Bridge. Inset: The Altar on O'Connell Bridge. (Davis). 
routed the Irish King's army, surprising that King from his bath. Too late, into the Liffey sailed Asgall's fleet. But the Norse would fight. Two thousand warriors of Viking blood marched together, arm to arm, against the eastern, St. Mary's, gate, near the present entrance of the Lower Castle yard. They were clad completely in iron, some in long coats of mail, others with iron plates fastened to their tunics, all bearing round shields painted red and rimmed with iron, and long battle-axes. In Asgall's name, John the Furious led them, for he was a great man in the Orkneys and a famous Viking. De Cogan, disciplined descendant of the same race, charged the Northmen in front, his brother Richard charged on the flank. On the Thingmote, the huge mound on which Norse Dublin held its parliaments and law courts (the clay was spread long afterwards to make staid Nassau Street), an Irish chief took his stand with his men. He had been told by de Cogan to wait and take the winning side, and he waited. When he saw the thick Norse ranks wavering, his men rushed in, and the Norse were borne down. They fled, to the sea, to the ships, their real home. Riding, running and slaughtering madly, the Normans and the Irish pursued. After killing ten English with his axe, John the Furious died by de Cogan's lance. Then, they took Asgall and brought him to his own hall, and he defied them, saying that this is but an essay of our might, and if I live, it'll not be long till far more than these shall come; and then they cut off his head. 
The moon we thought so much of is hidden by the mist and the clouds, so that there's not a glow of it. We turn right and left, and walk across the double-gates of a canal that's as shiny and black as the surface of hard coal. Children throw pieces of packing-case into the water to make them dive, and Jer gathers a few rich phrases, comments that are vigorously descriptive. In a dried-out canal dock a sun-cracked barge sits high on the mud. Then we come out into winding streets, banked by little shops, that sell groceries, mixed millinery, newspapers, and there also is the result of the only Roman conquest, the fish-and-chip saloon. The houses are nearly all of brick, and the bricks are begrimed and patterned into an infinite variety of browns and reds. We talk low. Only the trams and the 'buses jar on that air which is so quiet, so fitted for the murmuring of the old women in their doorways. We come into Irishtown. It's a queer thing, remarks Denis, the pipe out again, that you'll hear fellows saying how Irish Dublin was, even in the time of the Tudors. I suppose, he adds, the English called it Irishtown because it wasn't. We begin talking of all the cities of Ireland that have or have had Irishtowns. Jer says that a history of them would be a big work for an historian, and then, diverging, he talks of how this Irishtown of Dublin, this very homely place, was heartily decorated during the Eucharistic Congress and of how he discovered a displayed picture of Pope Leo XIII with " Long live the Pope " written underneath it, a fine profession of the perpetuity of St. Peter. Then himself and Denis fall to memories again. We pass through new streets, through a little public park where the grass is desiccated and thin and where there's a stone house that looks like a farmhouse from which the fields have fled, and we reach the sea road. Denis begins to search on the right for a bungalow in which he spent many a holiday when he was a boy, cooking and eating and living as master of the house. He says he's afraid that it's gone with all the newness. He speaks with great regret. Is that it ? Jer asks, and points to a green wooden building behind bushes and a wall. Denis smiles happily. All along the right-hand side of the road are tiny garden-patches, thick with cabbage, lettuce, onions, and here and there are cell-like ramshackle huts, built of odd pieces of timber, and their owners lean on the wall and watch the sea as the light goes. At last, after going round by the yard of the Pigeon House, we walk out on the sea wall. On the right, a waste of sand uncovered by the tide, is spread and lagooned as far as the coast and on it, near us, are a snow-thick flock of squawking gulls, and a man and a boy digging for cockles. Ahead of us at the end of the wall the redlit lighthouse is like a toy, and it's hard to make out the few distant people. Halfway is a low square building, the Half-Moon Swimming Club, and I wonder whether the name was drawn from the long crescent-shaped wall. The wall is cased in narrow long slabs of granite, mostly laid evenly, but here and there sunken by the sinking of the rubble and the deep-sea sand beneath. We had expected wind, but there's none. The lights along the outsweeping coast are hazy, and on the right, the Wicklow mountains, and on the left, Howth like a hump, are blurred along the heights. It is pleasantly warm, not now oppressive. A young lad, and a girl who has very white hair and blue eyes (and is not therefore of Scandinavian origin) are sitting side by side on a piece of low wall, facing the City, and there is a flush, from light, on their cheeks. We turn to look back. Against the last burning of the sun, gantries and cranes and girders are locked low across the sky. The river and the sea are winered, a wine that throws up light redly from its depths. 
My two friends look and look and smoke till I have to tell them to move, and they turn and walk and go on smoking. 
The imaginative game that I began playing on O'Connell Bridge comes back to me and I fall to thinking how the real bitterness entered the conflict of Ireland and England in the time of Elizabeth or thereabouts. Before that it had been more or less a conflict of appetites, of greed mostly, between the men of two nations who at least possessed in common the same theology ; and then, with the religious persecution under Elizabeth, there was added something to make the conflict a business of absolutes, to make it bitter to the death. The greed was stimulated. Ireland became a happy-hunting-ground for wretched traders, adventurers, and Dublin was their tent. There were, it's true, gallant soldiers among them, but a few swallows do not make a summer. There was one of that crew, Adam Loftus, a Yorkshireman, Archbishop of Dublin under the new religion and Lord Chancellor. He was one of the men who, through fear, had O'Hurley of Cashel tortured and hanged on Dublin's Gallows Hill. By his enemies he was named '' the most voracious caterpillar of the State." He had a big family. It increased in number, wealth, and power, for its alliances entwined many of the great Anglo-Irish families. He represented, and indeed was, Dublin Castle. When Sir John Perrot, (whom Loftus feared) was made Lord Deputy, it was a matter of course for him, even taking his mad temper and tongue into account, to fall foul of the Archbishop. He was a new arrival. He wanted to found a university in Dublin and to use St. Patrick's Cathedral for the purpose. But the deanery was the town residence of Loftus. (He had a country house in Rathfarnham.) Loftus opposed Perrot. He carried on the usual intriguing. He won. Then, he espoused the cause of learning in the form of Trinity College. It was the Dublin Corporation which was instrumental in having the College built on the site of the suppressed monastery of All Hallows, because it presented these lands as a free gift. The foundation-stone was laid by the mayor, Thomas Smith, nicknamed Bottle Smith, for his work as official poisoner of the Irish rebels, and it was he who tried to make Shane O Neill leave this life by drinking doctored wine. After a few years, Perrot left Ireland for the Tower of London. 
Christ Church 
Then, there were whisperings and scandals about the financial goings-on of the Lord Chancellor and other Castle officials. Robert Legge, Deputy Remembrancer of the Exchequer in Ireland, was commissioned to investigate. He presented his audit. The huge sum of £24,000 (multiply it by twelve to get it into our money) was put forth as the amount that Loftus owed to the- State. Loftus, Legge reported, was " greatly indebted" to her Majesty. Loftus sent for Legge and called him a knave, slave, rascal, and wished the bottom had fallen out of the ship which carried Legge to Ireland. But they couldn't beat Loftus. He wrote some letters to England. He was as innocent as a babe. Legge was dismissed. The Tudor character of Dublin began to disappear about the time of the Stuart Restoration. Between the departure of the Tudors and the return of the Stuarts there were the many heartbreaks of a broken Gaelic aristocracy, of a confiscated and planted Ulster, of the Confederate Wars, of Cromwell and the sundering Gaelic Ireland that would know religious persecution, oblivion, mockery, terrible famine, the flight of families, and the rattling of frustrate arms. While Gaelic Ireland was being destroyed at the foundations, the first big expansion of the City began. That is a truth. If you can argue it away, then all I can reply is that you argue it away. I say it for it is the truth, and because - fetch me my toga and carry me to the Forum - I love Dublin less because I love Ireland more.  The City grew. Medieval walls were pulled down, for civic authorities on business are notoriously not lovers of historical remains. Boundaries were extended. Then something was begun which was to give Dublin forever, at least humanly speaking, the solid air of a port. Men started a struggle for mastery with drifting sands, river mud, and the sea. And to-day it lies as an almost completely man-made thing. Yet, in the middle of the seventeenth century, it could be described as one of '' the barred havens of Ireland." The river was choked up by sand, gravel, and refuse. Vessels couldn't enter it. With an ordinary tide, it was impossible to go up to the quay of Dublin (near Winetavern Street) with a ship that drew five feet of water. Ships of greater draught couldn't come any nearer than Ringsend, a mile from the City. With the ebb, the haven fell dry almost all over, above Ringsend as well as below it, so that you could go dryfoot around the ships at anchor except at the pool of Clontarf on the north and at Poolbeg on the south where ships had at least nine or ten foot of water. Shallowness wasn't the only trouble. There was hardly any shelter at all. In the late autumn of one year, ten or twelve vessels were driven from their anchors and were never heard of again. But the elements had to be mastered. By the end of the century, Ringsend had been piled up and the south bank made as shelter. It was done in about two decades. The Pigeon House road was raised. It was mighty work. When one remarks how far the water could spread at high tide, on the south for example as far as the foot of Holles Street, then one can grasp the labour of the building, dredging, haulage that went on decade after decade. For one hundred years went in the making of the South Wall. The City itself grew with the port. The wooden Tudor houses were pulled down for stone and brick. St. Stephen's Green and the Phoenix Park were laid out. The expansion was interrupted by the Jacobite War but after the Treaty of Limerick, the Protestant gentry, now an Ascendancy fixed in power, set their hands to the making of their magnificent Dublin. That growth from the Stuart Restoration, you can trace on old maps. About 1600, the City was a mile in perimeter, with a population of some 26,000. By 1700, College Green had been built in, and the north side of the City, that late arrival, was growing. By the middle of the eighteenth century, nearly all the waste had been reclaimed on the north and south banks of the river, the quays and long ranges of houses had been raised, and by the end of that same century, nearly all the lordly squares and houses had appeared. The City was seven miles round about, the population was touching 200,000, and Dublin was a capital. A capital of what ? Of which ? Of where ? 
We sit on the seat at the gate of the lighthouse yard, our faces towards the City. We are halfway out in the bay. The sea on either side of us makes no more ripple against the granite wall and the great heaps of boulders than it would make if you stirred it idly with your hand. The red fire over the City dies, and the water that lies shining before us to the estuary, darkens, seems to deepen. On the seat with us are three men, watching a fourth who stands over the end of a fishing line. They call him the Admiral and scoff at his fishing, and when he solemnly draws in the line and finds a little crab tangled on it, they advise him to put the little crab in the bag with whatever he has, so that it'll eat and grow to be a fair-sized lad, fit for a feed. He answers them good-humouredly. They are all old men, but very sunny, like sound pink apples. My two friends are talking of the old and dead names of streets and places in their Dublin, and of the names that remain. I listen for it's like listening to a poem, and I snatch at what names I can and group them grotesquely. There are names Scriptual like Adam and Eve Lane, Cain's Alley ; moral, like Goodman's Alley and Paradise Row ; animal, like Cow Parlour, Cuckoo Lane, Dog and Duck Yard ; or just human like the inevitable Love Lane, Cutpurse Row, Garter Court. They talk of new-fangled names like Cambridge Avenue, and the dullness of the naming raises their anger, and gives them regrets. They come around to the Rising of 1916, which, with 1922, is one of the few dates that Irishmen will talk about to-day. Denis saw and experienced the fighting and he broods over the part of old Dublin that seemed to have been destroyed by the flames. Jer recalls the kind of Dublin that jeered and damned the rebels, a Dublin that I never knew. I know as they drop half-sentences, phrases, words, that the old Dublin seems immeasurably distant, as remote as Carthage, and as much wrapped round by a romantic mist. They say and agree and nod their heads over it, that all the queer characters are gone, the characters who were as much a part of the City as ancient Christ Church hill, and as they talk and nod I see the irony that's unknownst to them in their words. Indeed they don't know it. They are characters and for them I wouldn't exchange a thousand dead Dublins, when Dublin was full of all its eighteenth century Georgian life. 
It was from that century that the City received its stamp, its lay-out, and whatever architectural beauty it possesses. There for you is the Custom House, pillared, porticoed and domed, outspread in exact symmetry, the peak of the spirit of that nation within a nation. It was a spirit that demanded beauty in exterior things, in speech, ironwork, railings, lampbrackets, bellpulls, in plaster ceilings, and the canon was of the Italian Renaissance. According to the age which produced that canon, the Georgian gentry tried to live ; that is, hard, fast, but always gaily. The gentry and the citizens swilled rather than drank, and Lord Chesterfield was horrified at the amount of claret that was put away, Chesterfield who fancied that the only sin was in not being a gentleman. One-third of the total number of buildings were houses for drink, dicing and cards. There were military displays and reviews in the Park, levees and entertainments at the Castle. There were plays to crowded and riotous theatres, Handel, fine books and scurrilous pamphlets, a packed stinking poor, beggars, mud, the Dean and his legend, the pox, fevers, blackguards and rakes, Mass in rickety buildings in lanes, and outside and round about on narrow farms, a nation almost forgotten, a nation into whose consciousness Dublin hardly entered at all. Ireland mostly came into Dublin in beggary, or furtively with a plot for yet another rising in arms. And Ireland has come to despise that other nation, the Ascendancy. To despise it does not diminish its greatness. It was as sudden in history as the Normans. It left its greatness in building, in letters, in politics. But, its energy being without deep springs, it was essentially a closed thing, an eccentric culture, proud of its achievements, and very certain that it's classic airs and modes were finality. By its own dosed mind it measured, and as a measure it imposed its own mind. It is not by a mere artistic fashion that the shepherdesses of the illustrated arcadies wear eighteenth century gowns ; nor is it a meaningless sign that Berkeley of the Ascendancy, solipsist, infidel and bishop, was the greatest philosopher of his age. 
We walk back along the wall. We talk only in short bursts now. I argue with myself that I should come to the Dublin which began to decay after the Union and to lose its gentry forever and fine high ways, the Dublin which filled after the Famine with a flying people, which knew O'Connell, Young Ireland, Davis, Mitchell, the Fenians, Parnell, Davitt and the rest. But it's no night for arguing with yourself. Any Dubliner is ready for an argument at any time. It's very dark now out at sea. The mist has lifted a little on a wind that nearly forgets to move. On the coast on either side, the lights have become more brilliant, less jerky. Lines and clusters of them glisten in towards the angle where the City is ; left of us and south, Dunlaoghaire, a hill of lights, then a line along Blackrock, Booterstown, Sandymount, and high on one of the Wicklow Hills, a scarlet bonfire; and on our right, on the north, Howth is a gloom against the nightclouds, and Sutton and Clontarf trail and scatter themselves. The lines meet in a jumble, and then go up the river, far away, in a long definite perspective that burns brighter and brighter into the port of Dublin. A vessel slides past towards the bar and the starboard light cuts a deep green reflection. The air is still warm. As we walk by the swimming shelter, we see two men standing lanky-legged in their shirts as they dry their heads. They argue as if it were their last night on earth. 
Cockle Pickers, Dublin Bay.
