For more than seven centuries no Irish born man or woman has been accorded the highest of earthly honours, canonisation by the Church. During all that period Ireland has been producing saints without number, and, during at least two centuries, countless martyrs of heroic mould. What is the explanation of this anomaly? It is certainly not due to lack of appreciation on the part of the Holy See. In the dark hours of persecution there was wine from the Royal Pope to cheer our fathers. A special Nuncio from Rome came to our shores at one great juncture which gave hope of a national and religious resurgence. At all times there was refuge and hospitality for Irish refugees at the Papal Court, and, since so-called Catholic Emancipation was won, successive Pontiffs have frequently expressed their high estimate of Irish Catholicism in its homeland and in lands across the four seas. Yet, for seven centuries, the Holy See has placed on the Calendar of Saints many holy men and women of other lands, but none from "the Island of Saints." The Penal Laws and the Religious Persecutions-though some people profess to regard this as a threadbare excuse rather than an objective explanation- really explain this anomaly. Other Catholic nations have had their periodic upheavals and succeeding peaceful intervals. But the steady pressure of the harrow of religious persecution on the Irish Catholic nation was never relaxed until our own day. Consequently the full quantum of energy present in our people was used up in passive resistance to an external force that often changed its methods but never released its strangle-hold. 
But we have lived to see the day when the Church of God in Ireland has shaken off the tyrant and has begun to live her life as a virile Catholic nation. The outward evidence is all over the land for all to see and the fact was broadcast to the world by the Emancipation Celebrations and the International Eucharistic Congress. Pulsating with conscious Catholic life, our people have time at last to take stock of the struggle and the victorious issue and to ask that recognition be accorded to the great heroes of our Faith and to the holy ones who have lived perfect lives in lowly places. Herein is to be found the significance of the present earnest movement for the canonisation of Blessed Oliver Plunket. Away back in the 19th Century a good beginning was made to have the Causes of many Irish Martyrs examined by the Roman Courts. The task of preparing their Causes is one entailing enormous labour. Possibly for this reason, amongst others, Blessed Oliver's case was selected as one more easily dealt with and one likely to bring a quick result. In the event Blessed Oliver's Cause succeeded and he was formally beatified in May, 1920. Thus the much more difficult part of his path to Canonisation was successfully covered after years of labour and research by devoted prelates, priests and laymen, most of them now no more. The choice of Blessed Oliver as the first fruits of Roman recognition of the Irish victory for the Faith was, moreover, singularly appropriate. He laboured and suffered at a juncture that merits the used-up title of a crisis. Two Olivers figured in it. Cromwell, like the thorough-going tradesman that he was, planned the uprooting of Irish Catholicism on a scale and in a manner not attempted previously. He tore the people off the land. No Irish reader need be told what all that implied. Irish people love land, even bad land. Let them be torn from the land of Ireland and their Irishism withers and dies. Cromwell's plan only partially succeeded. Economic causes would butt in. The Cromwellian planters needed the Irish serfs to work the land for them. And so many remained, but, of course, as serfs. But the part of his plan for destroying the religion of the serfs looked more like succeeding. The destruction or appropriation of their churches, the penal laws against the practice of the Catholic religion, and the penalties for their infraction, were so thorough in conception and execution that Cromwell's success seemed humanly certain. He reckoned, however, without considering the tenacity of the Catholic Gael and the heroism of men like Blessed Oliver. When Blessed Oliver came to Ireland he found the Cromwellian system in perfect operation and the Catholic religion devastated. He attacked the problem from every point. He preached and confirmed and ordained, he held Synods and Visitations, and working upon the loyalty and courage of the afflicted people in one decade in the Northern Province and in portion of the Midlands he undid for ever the work of the other Oliver. His example and inspiration animated and emboldened priest and prelate to do likewise in the rest of the land. And so to-day while one Oliver is remembered as associated with a curse the other is truly Blessed. Some other reasons why Blessed Oliver should be our first canonised Irish Saint in modern days will readily occur to most readers. He was not of Gaelic stock, he was of noble birth, he was a Palesman, he was a man of peace, he was respected by more than one English Governor of our land, he had many and powerful friends in high places - and yet he was after a travesty of a trial subjected to a barbarous death. If ever a man's life was taken in odium fidei it was Blessed Oliver's. Talking of a trial, is it not a strange piece of human perversity that impels unprincipled men to surround their crimes with all the paraphernalia of justice ? Surely the homage vice pays to virtue. Blessed Oliver's trial may stand as one of the most 
Blessed Oliver Plunket 
From a painting (attributed to a contemporary of Bl. Oliver) in the possession of Mr. Patrick Baggot, Elm Grove, Cabra, Co. Dublin, and reproduced by his kind permission. 
unjust in history. Herein Blessed Oliver is allowed to resemble his Divine Master. Blessed Oliver's high office yields another reason why he is singled out for special honour. He was Primate. He occupied the chair of St. Patrick and St. Malachy. St. Patrick established the Catholic religion in Ireland, St. Malachy re-organised it at another critical juncture and Blessed Oliver rescued it after a further cycle of centuries. And yet another reason. With all becoming submission we may well think that Blessed Oliver's long noviceship in Rome- in professors' chairs and in hospitals of the sick poor- his ceaseless endeavour, by letters and despatches, to keep in touch with his friends and helpers in Rome and thus keep up the "Roman connection" will have been noted as proof of his unswerving and undying attachment to the Roman See and to the Rock of Peter. The magnitude of the issues and his heroic demeanour before and on the scaffold have possibly withdrawn attention from the singular beauty and sweetness of Blessed Oliver's natural and supernatural character. Thus by personal holiness as well as by his high office he most worthily represents the Irish Catholic Nation not merely before the bar of the World's Court but before that of the most searching Court on earth, that of the Sacred Congregation that decides the Beatification and Canonisation of the Servants of God. Blessed Oliver in his life and death epitomised the religious struggle which is the glory of our race. That struggle is unique in the history of religious persecution. Hardly anywhere else do we find an instance of a whole people giving up everything they possessed, all their worldly goods, lands and property, and resulting social position, civil rights, education, worldly prospects of every kind and submitting to impoverishment and degradation in its literal sense rather than give up either the profession or the practice of the Catholic Faith. Blessed Oliver, a shepherd and leader of his people himself, did all this and to-day when the issue of the struggle is stabilised in victory we salute him as one of the great heroes of the Faith. This is, I feel certain, the meaning and significance of the widespread devotion to Blessed Oliver in recent years. This devotion had been growing in volume and intensity for several years prior to the formation two years ago of the League of Prayer for his Canonisation. Even long before his Beatification, in 1920, there existed considerable devotion to him in every part of the country. That this devotion is indeed national and not merely local is proved by the starting points of the various pilgrimages that weekly throng to his principal Shrine in Drogheda. They come from North, East, South and West, from Dublin and Belfast, from Waterford and Derry and Cork and Galway, from Wexford and Kerry and Donegal and from right across the Midlands. And the writer is in a position to make this arresting declaration about every single one of these Pilgrimages-they have been without exception absolutely spontaneous. They have not been sought for nor organised from any centre, but have been the natural outcome of popular devotion. It is no vain hope that this fervent devotion on the part of our people will soon be rewarded by the Canonisation of Blessed Oliver. May God spare our illustrious Pontiff thus to gladden Irish Catholic hearts and to establish another Papal claim to the love and loyalty of the faithful Irish Nation. 
Jan Vander Vaart' s mezzotint engraving of Blessed Oliver Plunket
