One morning last year we set out across Kerry for the Blaskets and struck Dunquin on a bad day. The sky was overcast, the sea rough and misty, and a strong wind was blowing from the south. Across the Sound, the Great Blasket - like a huge whale threshing up wide sheets of spray from her head and sides-looked forbidding and farther away than its three miles. And the longer we looked the more dispirited we became; our drive since dawn had been all in vain ! ... Just then Muirish, with two strapping lads taken from the turf, came down the hill to meet us. '' God and Mary to you ! " he said, sliding his oars to the ground. " You're in right time." I looked at the Artist, he looked at the Professor, and the Professor looked out to sea. "God and Mary and Patrick to you, Muirish," I replied hurriedly. "But isn't it a frightful day for the Island?" Muirish straightened himself with a jerk and gave us a pitying look. " Yeh, man," said he, indicating the North Atlantic in general and Saint Gregory's Sound in particular with a sweep of his hand, " 'Tis like a duckpond to-day." And with that, Muirish, shouldering his oars, beckoned his assistants, and together they turned down the rocky bohereen for the Slip. The Professor said it was foolhardiness and that even if we could get to the Island it wasn't the place in which to spend a whole day; the Artist called it madness and said what bothered him was that we might have to stick there all night. Nevertheless, like subjects mesmerised, we followed Muirish and his men. 
They had released the currach from its stays when we got down. All was business-like here; ropes were coiled, boards placed, and coats buttoned. Then Muirish's voice rang out. They got under the upturned boat and stepped off, their three pairs of legs shewing- for all the world like an immense beetle making for the sea. If you would see graceful movement-rhythm and poise personified-watch these Gaeltacht men launch a currach. As one man, instinctively, they halted at the water's edge, as one they dropped on one knee, as one they canted over the boat, lowering it until it sat lightly on the sea, and as one they stood up, erect, like saplings unconstrained. There was no mistaking it, Muirish was in command now. Imperiously, he ordered us to our seats and we got in. Then three bladeless oars slashed in to the sea and we were bounding southward against the wind, our currach leaping at ridge after ridge of hissing water that each moment threatened to overwhelm us. What chance had we against a wind like that ? Or against waves like these? Waves that, plunging past us, raged over the rocks and swept upward for twenty feet against the cliffs, deafening us with their thunder. To reassure myself, I looked at Muirish. His face was inscrutable. Then I looked at the boat. Boat ! It was a slip of a thing of light trellised laths and tarred canvas -a " cockle-shell,'' incredible, everything anything but my conception of what that instant should be a boat. Feverishly I poked the side with my finger and might have poked it through. I felt the water pulsing, surging, crashing against it. Heavens, was this the thing that was taking us to the Blaskets, was this all that was between us and how many fathoms of treacherous sea? The more I looked at the currach the louder the thunder sounded, and the louder the thunder became the smaller seemed the boat. Furtively I turned landward, my eyes searching the shore. And, as furtively, the Artist and the Professor selected the nearest point themselves. For a quarter of an hour no word was spoken-nothing but the hard regular breathing of the men. At least three of us were silent lest we speak our fear. We had turned westward, making for the open, when Muirish nodded towards a wedge of mainland on our left. " That's - Dunmore - Head,'' he shouted, the words being barely audible in the wind. Dunmore Head ! After all, if Muirish could talk of things like that at such a time he must feel sure of himself, must feel safe. So why not we ? The words eased the tension. The Artist tried to look interested. The Professor managed a wan smile. But Muirish merely had stopped for breath and now was shouting again. " 'Twas hereabouts-one of the Spanish Armada-' Our Lady of the Rosary ' was wrecked-wrecked, I say-with five hundred souls," and a particularly vicious wave split against our bow and splayed over us, drenching us with spray. The Professor gripped the gunwale till his knuckles whitened, and the Artist dipped a finger in the sea and blessed himself. But there was no turning back now. In the middle of the Sound we got the full force of the wind from the Skelligs and resentment towards my seat on the floor diminished with every wave. Soon I became even glad of that seat. At least I should be the last to be pitched overboard. For our currach was swaying drunkenly, one moment bouncing perilously over the crest of a breaker and the next moment shooting downward to meet another. There were times out there when our currach was encompassed by high sloping banks of water and we lost all sight of land. The Island was more than a mile away yet. Were we making any progess at all? Then, by some queer optical illusion, it seemed we were not even moving. Yet Muirish and his men were pulling harder than ever, pulling with all their might. We looked towards the island again. Now it was losing that whale-like appearance, was becoming more a conical hill upon a wall of ragged cliffs. Soon the houses became clearer, their white walls sharply outlined against the hill, and all clustering at its base. And then, framed against the darkness of doors and windows, appeared faces, old and young, heads hatted, kerchiefed, bare. We saw them sign to each other, heard them call excitedly; for to these lonely islanders a stranger boat spells romance- does it not come from the Big World beyond the Sound ? Shortly after, they were strolling down to the cliffs, their dogs barking, for we were below them racing northward for the Slip. But landing was impossible there. The sea was breaking over it furiously, and Muirish said it would be submerged for several hours. He shouted to a group of islanders above and a young man climbed down over the cliff and stood on a lip of rock, lifting or lowering himself as the waves rose or fell. Could we but take him off he would pilot us to a landing place. But could we ? Four times we raced under him on a breaker without success. A moment's, an inch's miscalculation would mean disaster - canvas is no match for Blasket crags. Backing out for the fifth time, we bounced forward on the back of a rising wave. In we shot and upward, skimming the cliff by a fraction, till our pilot leapt lightly to a seat a split second before we 
An Blascaod Mór 
Little houses and small fields cling to the rocks and cliffs of the Great Blasket. 
The canoe is borne to safety 
Evening, and rest after labour. 
A bright company and a fiddler. 
slithered back into the sea. Taking an oar he steered us northward along that rocky shore and beached us with ease on the White Strand. We had reached the Blasket after all. Our fears had been but figments of the imagination; as we climbed out I looked at the smiling faces of the oarsmen and understood. So, when the sun burst out gloriously, a moment later, I felt it was being less discreet than Muirish and his men who, for an hour or so, must have been tantalised with inward laughter at those Gaeltacht visitors who considered a mere gust a gale and a ripple a regular Blasket wave ! A group of islanders, all wearing blue jerseys and wide-brimmed black hats, greeted us on the cliffs. " Dé bheatha-sa, Dé bheatha-sa Stróinseiri ! " they said, and the whole island, as if by magic, echoed their greeting. It came from turf rick and tiny plot, over half-door or through the window, it came from everyone and everywhere, but always it was the same : " Dé bheatha-sa, Dé bheathasa Stróinseiri ! "-" Welcome, Welcome Strangers ! '' And so we walked the path along the cliffs to the village. The village consists of about thirty houses, including a school, set at all angles against the hill. In contrast with the warmth within, for all of the houses are comfortable and many of them are even roomy, their whitewashed walls and roofs of tarred canvas make even more dreary a landscape already bleak in the extreme. On the island, you will hear occasional references to "roads," but they are merely uneven stony paths. They run up-hill and down, they cross and re-cross and wind precariously along the cliffs, yet for the unwary it is always but a step to eternity. These Blasket '' roads '' were not made for mere mortals but for the legs of men born to the sea. The islanders-there are about one hundred and twenty in all- are a simple, 
dignified, courteous people. It is only by the utmost industry that they manage to get a living, wrung from churlish soil and snatched dangerously from the sea. For all that, they are extremely hospitable and even light-hearted, the sternest of them ever ready for song or dance. If we had reason to know Muirish' s worth as an oarsman, we had even more reason to appreciate his efficiency as a guide. In the village he was at home and made us feel at home too. He visited house after house, having news for this person and that and we, being at his heels, drew up our chairs to many a fire. At the end of the village a tall woman greeted us- a queenly woman in whom age and youth blent strangely, with a head that a Rodin might rave over and a tongue of Irish that is a joy. She talked of many things but chiefly of the language. Was it going forward in the country? she asked. Were they doing enough for it? Shame on them so spiritless who would sell that "jewel of our ancestors '' for the confusing jargon of the Gall ! We shall never forget Peg Guheen. Tomas O'Crohan met us at his own door. A spare, thin-lipped man with piercing eyes, Tomas was over forty when he learned to read and write. Later he became an author and now one sees framed on the kitchen wall, the Aonach Tailteann Certificate of Award for his book, "An t-Oileanach," published in 1929. It is a crisply-written frank and full account of life on the island for seventy years and is now established as a standard work. It has been translated by Dr. Robin Flower, who was intimately acquainted with Tomas and who is well known and highly esteemed on the island. Everywhere we went there was proof of the people's industry. Men were digging in their stony plots, young lads were drawing up seaweed, and donkeys, straddled with baskets of turf, were being led down the hill. We chatted for a while about the foreign trawlers to a young man who was mending his net. '' The fishing is going from bad to worse ! And no wonder," he said, pointing his wooden needle towards the bay. " 'Tis like Broadway out there at night !" Then we sat on a wall watching an old man lengthening - actually lengthening - his currach. It is a difficult job, lengthening a currach; but life on this remote island has sharpened the wits and readied the hands of the islanders until they can build a currach or carve a miniature ship, or even make a fiddle with ease. The old man was an expert, Muirish said. Still, as I watched him splice that gunwale and drive home his light copper nails, I couldn't help feeling doubtful of her chances in the face of a Blasket gale. After lunch at Maire's, the Professor proposed a walk. Muirish led us up the hill by a bridle-path. This pass has a curious history. It seems that many, many years ago someone decided to run a " road " up this hill and westward through the island. It was no easy task, but the islanders fell to work. They toiled at it until it ran from the village to the summit and there they gave up their road-making and built a tower instead-a tower that is at once the road's end and tombstone. Were they awed, up there, at sight of the surrounding sea, or moved by higher impulse? We do not know; but who will say they did not do the right and even appropriate thing -these islanders whose hearts are set on the sea, whose souls on Heaven! There are some fine views from the top of the hill. The island itself, completely altered when seen from here, staggers westward for over four miles to a point, and becomes even more precipitous and bleak. To the east is the mainland from Sybil Head to Slea Head with Croagh Marhin and Mount Eagle in between. Southward lie the Skelligs and Iveragh, while to the north and west are Inishtuiscirt, the Tearaght and the other island of the Blasket group, and farther west the widening ocean where Atlantic liners go by. As the Artist had to make notes for a painting, and the Professor delayed watching strange sea-birds, it was late afternoon when we returned to the village for tea. Then the boys gathered in and there was a seanchas. There were tales of Pierce Ferriter, of his escapes from the Cromwellians on this very island - it was Ferriter property once-and brave tales of their own struggles with the sea. But a Blasket seanchas is but an excuse for a céilidhe, so when the stories flagged a young fellow reached for his fiddle and soon there were songs all round. But even as they talked or played or sang - and is it not typical of their life !-these islanders worked, for twigs were being topped and plaited for the potaí that soon now would be set for lobsters in the fissures of the cliffs far out at Inishnambro and Inishvicullane. The Artist was shouting arís after " An Cóisire" when Muirish stuck up his head. " Time to be pushing off now," he said. " 'Tis getting late." I looked at the Professor, he looked at the Artist, and the Artist looked out to sea. The sinking sun had flung a pale gold carpet across the Sound from the Slip to the Great Cliff of Dunquin, and there was scarcely a breath of wind. " Yeh, man, 'tis like a pane of glass now," said Muirish. " What more do you want ? " and the three of us looked up. " I want a storm, Muirish !" said the Artist. " A long one," added the Professor. ''Longer,'' said I.
