I stood on the quayside in Dublin on Sunday, 19th September, as ten coffins were borne one by one from the Glasgow boat to Irish soil. The hush of the multitude was broken only by the sobs of women. Strong men wept. These ten coffins surely gave one to think, and drove one's mind to the conditions which compel fine Irish lads to endure worse living and housing than beasts, to slave and toil and die, even as those whose ashes the coffins brought, a holocaust to the greed and selfishness of a materialistic society. It was not voluntarily, but through dire necessity, that these ten dead boys, whose ashes we followed on the Dublin quays, had sheltered in the death-trap of a locked Scottish bothy. Dire necessity to get bread for themselves, and still more for those they loved, this it was that had made them go. Grief and sympathy the crowd on the quayside certainly displayed, and the newspapers told us that, as the caskets of ashes passed across the land, moving scenes of grief and piety were witnessed along the route. Empty tears and hollow piety these, unless they portend the arousing of the conscience of our people, the arousing of remorse for the toleration of conditions of life which cost, too frequently, the health and even the lives of our Western people. Nor can we longer salve our conscience and blame the Saxon. Now that we are masters in our own land, are spectacles like those of Arranmore and Achill to be symptomatic of the use of our much-vaunted freedom? What matters political freedom to people who know not whence the next meal will come? What matters political freedom if our finest lads must still slave for the foreigner, and return, caskets of ashes ? The tragedy of life as it exists on the Western seaboard of Ireland should be a constant cause of remorse to our whole people. Nor can resolutions of sympathy or subscriptions to palliative funds acquit us of our responsibility in tolerating the appalling hardships with which fellow Irishmen have to contend in their struggle for bread. The national conscience, if we have a national conscience in this matter, cannot rid itself of its plain obligation by votes of sympathy or a pittance of a few thousand pounds, nor can it acquit itself of guilt, by accession, in the tragedies which time and again follow as a consequence of these conditions. No, resolutions and contributions will not suffice : the whole people must discharge its duty and remove the causes of these disasters, and remove them radically. Those of us whose lives are in the Ireland of easy-chairs, of cinemas and canned music, of golf and tennis, of jazz dance and of autocars; those of us who so avidly chase every new sensation, who are at such pains to try new methods of "killing time "- how can we realise the day-in, day-out struggle for bread by the victims of materialism and selfishness who live on barren rocks by the Atlantic. The men and women of the West, a great people, a grand people, in spite of ill-informed criticism, seek not to " kill time " ; they have more than enough to do to keep body and soul together, and, as we. see, ofttimes perish in the attempt. It is not to "kill time " they slave for months on British farms, bending in heavy toil bodies unfitted for such labour by ill-feeding and underfeeding. It is not in "killing time" they get swept to death in Atlantic storms or burnt to death in Scottish bothies. No, they dare death that they may stave off starvation from those they love. Great in this generation of dissipation and degeneracy are these men and women of Western Ireland. Great in their courage, great in their fidelity, great in their love; as His Grace the Archbishop of Tuam has said, of the ten dead boys, "martyrs to duty." In our easy-chairs we may not hope to realise the mode of life of the men and women of the West. What do we know of barren rock, and windswept homestead? What do we know of farms on which, as that good friend of the West, the late Dr. C. M. O'Brien, once said to me, "there grows not grass enough to feed a hare" ? What do we know of young women delicate in health, and old women white with the struggle of years, condemned to toil and bear on their backs the very soil with which they are to "make land" between rocks to grow their little patch of potatoes, the while their menfolk and boys are gone to Britain to try and earn a few shillings to pay the shop-keeper who has been supporting them through the winter. No, we can know nothing of Western life nor can anyone who has not lived it realise its appalling tragedy of suffering, slavery, starvation and disaster. Realise it ! Why, we have not time to think of it ! Our bridge-parties might suffer and our sherry-parties might cease to attract if we thought too much ! "Why should we think, it is no concern of ours." No, our concern is to build luxurious stabling, artificially lighted and heated, for our prize animals, to over-feed our lap-dogs, and trim silk cushions for our pet cats ! Our fads and fondlings must be pampered; our fellows may die, whether by famine or fire or flood ; '' it is no concern of ours.'' It is no concern of ours that we welcome to our shores immigrants from every corner of the world the while we send the finest lads of our own land to die in torture abroad ? It is no concern of ours that we give to those who do not want, and see our finest peasantry perish ? The whole people is responsible ; the whole people must undo the curse of Cromwell. Half-measures are worse than useless. For generations we have suffered from half-measures and palliatives. Even the advances made by our own Governments have been but half-hearted, half-hearted because you and I are not behind the Governments in their efforts to deal with the Western problem. We are the culprits ! We have been selfish, self-complacent, indolent, and intolerant of the sufferings of others being brought home to us. We are the culprits ! We have found fault, we have criticised, we have complained of the efforts of government for these children of the Gaeltacht. They were being " petted" and "pampered" and "placed" ! We have paralysed work for the betterment of their condition, and rendered sterile any thought of radical handling of the problem ! We are the culprits ! The conditions which cost the lives of our Irish boys have shocked us ! Then let us remove them ! These conditions are not the " damnable" Scottish bothy nor the Lancashire byre nor any other British indignity. The conditions which have caused us " shock " are within Ireland and not without. The insanitary British bothy is not the curse but the conditions of life which force our people to such a pass. We need not go to Britain in search of bothies or litter beds; we condemn our own people in their own country to conditions equally shocking. Let us not be hypocrites, the fault is not in the Briton, it is in ourselves. We are the culprits ! And we are the more guilty because these conditions of life on our Western seaboard'. are not ineradicable. True, they are a legacy from the past, they are the results of a system of calculated cruelty, of foreign landlordism, foreign domination and impudent intolerance. The people of the West are the victims of that system. The legacy from Cromwell, from Penal Laws and from rack-renters we have continued to maintain. We are the masters now. The system is ours. Shock at conditions in Britain will not do, change of conditions in Britain will not do. Let us be shocked at our own indifferent, material and selfish selves. The things to shock us are the conditions of living we impose on a better people than ourselves. " Sympathy " and " shock " are only cant in this matter. By expressing them we try to assure ourselves that we are not guilty. We are hypocrites in this whole matter or else we shall end now the outlawry which we have continued to impose upon the people of the Atlantic coast of our land. The people of the West are our victims, they are condemned by us even as by Cromwell. The people of the West have paid the price of our national freedom and of our national faith. They and their forefathers have made possible, by sacrifice and by death, the liberty we Irish enjoy to-day in our faith and government. They have been, and continue to be, the custodians of our national language, of our traditions and of the spiritual outlook of our people. They are the people who have saved the soul of the Irish nation, in so far as it is saved, from complete anglicization and materialism. We are their debtors, we must repay ! The people of the West survived foreign attacks on language, faith and liberty. They are dying now at the hands of their brothers and with them is passing all that marks us out as a distinct people and a nation. By our neglect they are passing and with them is going the language and spirit of the Gael. And we stand by, we who tax ourselves that our children may speak the tongue which these people have conserved for us. We stand by while the Gaeltacht bleeds to death. We fruitlessly tax ourselves for if we do not save the natural custodians of our language, in its stronghold, we might as well try to make Yiddish our mother tongue. The Gaels, whom we condemn to foreign slavery, find the foreign tongue and foreign customs pay better. It does not pay them to be Irish speakers in Britain and we do not seem to make it worth their while to be so, at home. They are going and as surely as they go so surely is the revival of Irish a forlorn hope. Let us not be hypocrites in this matter either. " Save the language" is all very well. Save first the only people who can save it. The people of the West have suffered and died to save the Irish nation, the Irish nation must now save them, and at once. Cost what it may, the people of the West must be treated as members of our national family, not as outcasts, in this land which is theirs. The people of the West must have made to them restitution of their birthright. They are our kith and kin, and must have equality of opportunity with the rest of us. This opportunity we must support the Government in providing, and count not the cost. We can provide millions to equip us to bring death, let us now gird ourselves to sacrifice, that a great and grand people may have hope and life.
