Connacht, the " lost" province, out on its own, cut off from the main current of life in the big world, out on its own, too, in the quality of the scenery and the blended lights and half-tones that enchant its hills. A place, above anywhere else in the world, to apostrophise and break into poetry over, and yet it has a level-headed, cool, seeming-slow people to guard it from the apostrophisers. Why should there not be giants and omens in such a solitude, where almost a shadow can take colour ? And deserts in miniature in it, with rags and bones of rocks and standing stones, so that the primitive seems still to abide here. And those mountains flashing with crystal above Delphi to make a man think upon magic, not necessarily a Connachtman, but, likely enough, the stranger bewitched by this landscape that changes shape and form under varying skies. A hard place to have lived in in the days gone by ; so hard in the years of the famine and the cholera that many who escaped out of it never again wished to hear tell of it, for telling and thinking could, by remembrance of the beauty, break the heart a second time. There is a dreadful picture of that forgetting in "Nana," a memory of an old nurse, a book published in 1936, that has been strangely neglected in Ireland, where it deserved thousands of readers. And how many Connachts are there ? Connacht of the little communities, living weather-bound sometimes, beyond reach of the tax-gatherer and the bailiff. Connacht of the island-dwellers skilled in the hazard of the sea, but often losing the desperate game, as the graves of the wrecked will testify. Connacht of the harvesters and the migrant men picking and piling in the hard fields and sleeping in hard places, and sometimes dying amid the stranger. Connacht of the town men, sure and safe and far-seeing, as townsmen often are, improving their sons with schooling for the ascent from the town to the city in the next generation. Connacht of the Mayo men, reputed melancholy, the Sligo men, reputed keen, the Leitrim lads slow to affirm, the Galway men, genial and quick, the Roscommon men, holding their own- all these, shallow judgments that the Connachtman will himself best analyse and expose, for he is a fair enough fellow when you make him your friend. That, and much more, is Connacht in skeleton outline. You can fill up the body of it with history and Cromwell and all the wars. But, as a writer elsewhere suggests in this CAPUCHIN ANNUAL, Connacht has had enough of history, and especially of the Cromwell invocation. These things can never happen again and we all have had, or ought to have had, too much " history " in Ireland. Now is the time to stage some new, more peaceful, and, so, more stirring, stuff. Connacht has begun to do that, or at any rate is thinking about beginning. Hail new Connacht !
