When the fever rises in me, no cure beneath the skies can save me till I make off home across the Shannon. I don't see stick or stone along the road, or man, woman, or child. " I have eyes for nothing, till I wheel round that bend, you know the one I mean, 'tis the sharp, right-hand bend beyond the borders of Roscommon," said I to the city man beside me. By way of answer he only looked blankly at me. Wouldn't you think I ought to have more sense than to talk like that to a man that was as worried as the hard city pavements on a July day? " We'll soon be at it now," I continued. Actually we were covering the ground at a pleasant 35 miles an hour. " Her we are ! " It was wicked the way I took that bend ! I went round it on one wheel, and in less time than it takes me to tell you about it, the Reek was peeping at us across the plains of Mayo. " Take the full of your yes of that, my boyo !" " Mayo God help us," said he, jeering; "can't we talk of something else for a change? '' "No trouble at all to me. I could talk about anything. Now what about Galway ? " I said. " Wouldn't that do you ? Did you ever see a Galwayman with the sea-blue in his eyes ? " "Ninny !" said he, " is that all you saw in Galway ? " '' I saw more than that,'' I answered. I was on my mettle now. " I saw the gulls wheeling above the furrow as a Galway man drove a pair of white horses before the plough." 
" Raimeis, woman, you're mad," aid he, and he was evidently a little vexed. Nothing daunted, I kept at it. '' Did you ever see clouds of springwhite April clouds dancing over the Twelve Pins? Clouds full of power and beauty, and as light on the foot as a fairy.'' " Raimeis," said he " and if you don't top talking I'll get out and walk." " Walk from here to Lough Makyou'd have corns on your hoofs for ever." I looked at him and I was just about to ask him did he ever climb Croagh Patrick on a July Sunday; did he ever pick the pilgrim's sandy, stony, steps to the mountain-top ? But when I saw the fire in his eye I changed my tactics altogether. "But maybe I never saw the things you saw," I aid. " Tell me what you think to be the real things of Connacht." " You'll be expecting me to tell you about the Spanish wine that came into Galway, and of the way that Lynch hanged his own on, but you'll be disappointed when I tell you instead that the Spanish woman of Galway is a myth, and that the Spanish olive beauty of the West is a Firbolg. Did you never hear of Cromwell ? " said he. I was gathering steam all during that last bit, but when he mentioned Cromwell I felt near exploding. " I'll scream," I thought, " if he says ' To hell or to Connacht.' '' As sure as you're a foot high, the thought had hardly crossed my mind when he lapped it out at me. Grey Connacht of the misty mountain-tops, that's all they know about you ! Just that bit about Cromwell. "To hell or to Connacht, indeed" nothing could stop him now, so I just listened ; "but long before Cromwell was born Connacht had its birth, and Connacht lives to-day long after Cromwell's death, and 'twould be interesting to contrast Cromwell and Connacht if only for the sake of argument. It is to the pride of Connacht that the foreigner hit upon that province to be the refuge of the Irish from Ulster, Munster, and Leinster. " Since then Connacht has had its revenge. English literature," he continued, "the language of Elizabeth and 
Lynch's Castle, Galway
Cromwell has been enriched by the men of the West." I knew that bit was coming, " To hell or to Connacht," and then " The men of the West," and that's all they know about us. "While we honour in song and in story," I began to sing " I was referring to Yeats, Moore, Higgins and all the other men of the West," said he, just like that. It was becoming increasingly difficult to debunk this city man. 
"Ah, wait till you see my Connacht. If only I could show you the Connacht that I know." " I have seen all I want to see of it, thank you." And that was the answer he made me. I stopped talking and stepped on the gas. How familiar the place was becoming ! Past Cong and Cross with blue Nephin stretched across the skyline behind them ; another whileen and we'll be on Lough Mask and Lough Carra. I was at home at last. Here was the place where I knew every man, woman and child ; not only did I know every man, woman and child, but I knew their dogs. "We'll pull up," I said, and I ran the car to a standstill on the roadside. " I want you to come over here for a minute." I was pointing to where I had seen gusts of grey smoke puffing and rising and blowing free behind a clochan. I'd know tinker Mangan's smoke anywhere. Just grey, lazy smoke of brushwood and rag . In my mind's eye I could see him lying on the grass. He jumped up as we approached, smoothed back his black, curly hair that was shining with sweat and smoke. Myself: " Hello there, Mangan." Mangan : "Dia dha reidhteach, but it's yourself that's in it." Myself: "Tell me, how are you after all this time." Mangan : " Just spending the world. The best of them cannot do any more than that, and show me anyone that isn't grumbling. But who's that man with you?'' Myself: "That's my husband." Mangan: "But they told me you married a policeman ! Bad cess to you, why did you do that ? Shake hands, sir, and you're the first policeman that ever shook my hand. I always hate them even when I have nothing on my conscience.'' 
Myself : " Never mind that, Mangan, but sing a song." Mangan : " What kind of a song ? " Myself : " One of them shut-eye ones." City Man: " Do you know any love song ? " Mangan : " Blatheration ! Love, is it ? I wouldn't give you a thraneen for all the love in Connacht. Do you think I'd bother my brain with little tit-bits of songs about women." City Man : " All right then ; what'll you sing ? " Mangan: "A song about the Fenians." Myself : " That comes well from you, Mangan, and you with your war-pen ion from the British Empire in your pocket." Mangan: " The Empire be hanged ! Up the Republic ! But tell me what brought you back again to these parts ? '' Myself : '' Just trying to refresh my memory. I want to write about Connemara. Maybe you'd be able to tell me things that no one else knows." . Mangan : " Ah, it's the height of foolishness ! Look at here to me, no matter what kind of a tall story you'll tell, someone else is bound to come along and cap it. Stretch out there in the sun and take your ease like me, and let them all fight it out between them." City Man (pointing) : " That's lovely country over there." Mangan: " That was Boycott's place." City Man : " The name that gave a new word to the English language." Mangan : " And that's George Moore's country, this side of it." City Man : " Now there's something for you to write about." Mangan: " We'll say nothing about him, for we'll let the dead rest." Myself : " You're no good to me at all. Can't you tell me anything ? What about Granuaile ? " Mangan : " Her that could spit out like a man at the queen of England ! Aye, and sailed her own boat across the channel to do it. And all the talk you hear these times about the rights of women ! Rights how are you ! 'Tis many a day ago since she took all the rights she wanted and dared anyone say ' boo ' to her either. " · Myself : " Now that's a grand bit for me." Mangan : " You're welcome to but don't mention me." City Man : " But why not ? " Mangan: " Nobody would believe a word of it, if they heard I said it." 'Twas evening now and as we made our uneven way over the stones and through the wizened thorn bushes, the last labourer came heavy-footed from the harvest field, and as the ghosts of the past rose from the dusk around us the sun went down to rest behind the Partry hills. King Roderick O'Connor, the last King of Ireland, was buried a few miles from here, in Cong, and I pointed towards Lough Corrib. " On Inchagoill a stone stands inside the remains of Temple Patrick Church, with an inscription commemorating Lugnaedun, the reputed nephew of St. Patrick. But inside this little cottage here, there's a great friend of mine." I opened the half-door and spoke to the old lady at the fire. Without turning round she recognised my voice, although she hadn't heard it for over five years. '' I cannot see, but thank God for the hearing. Where were you ever since ? " Her voice was soft as velvet. " Finding a husband, Peg, and I brought him to see you." " He's welcome here, indeed,'' said she. There was a caress in that welcome. " Come over,'' I said, " and shake hands with Peg. " " Are you living alone here ? " he asked her. " All alone, avic." " But you must be lonely ? " 
" I don't be a bit lonely, then, avic, oh, there doesn't be a body here except myself and the Blessed Virgin." " This man is a city man, Peg," I explained. "He thinks that maybe you'd be afraid of fairies." "Fairies, asthore," said Peg, " I was out all hours of the day and night and I never saw anything worse than myself." " Although you don't see them, Peg, you know they're in it all the same ? " I ventured. " Faix no, there's nothing that way bothers me at all ; I don't be afraid of anything, for but a few miles from here, as the crow flies, the Power of the Evil Eye was killed for ever on the plain of Moytura.'' " But that was before Christ," the city man explained ; '' 'twas the famous battle between the Fir Bolg and the Tuatha De Danann, when Balor of the Mighty Blow and Evil Eye was killed by a stone from a sling which put out his eye, the same evil eye which flashed the fire of doom on anyone who ' dared' it." " Hail Mary, full of grace. The Lord is with thee .... " 
We slipped out quietly. Peg wasn't listening to us at all. " I suppose we'll tart off for Dublin in the morning,"- I said as I pulled the half-door to, behind me. I really had no intention of doing anything of the sort. I was merely sounding the depths. It was no use. He strolled along in silence. "Wake up," I said, trying to provoke him into argument. " You're like one that neither lost nor won, but I'm sure that I know what you're thinking about. You're trying to make up your mind about the Connacht man. Don't bother yourself ; you'll never solve him. The sturdy, shrewd, realistic Connacht man, the calculating, wild, untamed Connacht man is one with the mystic, the dreamer and the idealist, but the one is never, or hardly ever, allowed to influence the other." I got only one sentence from him in reply. " I wasn't listening to you at all," he said, '' I was just thinking that I know now what Higgins meant when he said, ' With the bawneen men I am one.' "
