Bright -Beautiful City was Cork in the Gaelic song, and the stranger will find it a very engaging place, and begin to feel something of the affection it inspires in its sons. As in most Irish cities little in it is really old, though much of it is of another century; but tradition is more enduring than stone and in the name of a parish church one can see the monastery that Saint Finbar founded by Lough Eric thirteen centuries ago; and in the name of a street the little walled island that was the Irish - Danish - Norman city of later times. Now the marshes have all been built over and the houses are spread on all the hills above the Lee. (The visitor should know, however, that there are still two channels of the river flowing through the city, otherwise he may be puzzled and even alarmed at coming upon the river again immediately after crossing it.) From the outskirts on these hills are striking views of the city and the surrounding country. Away to the south the hills are still green, the lovely valley of the Lee peeps in at the west, downstream the river, with great neat factories on one side and the confusion of shipping on the other, widens to an impressive estuary. Below is the close mass of the city, immensely irregular, towers, spires, chimneys, rather coloured, with streets rising steeply. Hidden in this amorphous scene is the distinction of the city, the names of places, the old gentle houses, the little arbored streets. In a mood this might be only the detritus of an alien civilisation, a memory of the centuries when the Irishman was a helot in this place, tut to-day it is inseparably part of Ireland's Cork and we are glad for it. 
There are only a few show streets. St. Patrick Street, famous, " the finest street in Europe only for the bend in it." There are fine new buildings here, and international amusement and store, but the street retains a good deal of its character, and farmers with frieze coat and ashplant accord with it ; though the emporium seems modern there was one here in 1850 that had zoo assistants. The Grand Parade, spacious, with a poor but touching national monument, merging into the Victorian South Mall with its memorial to the Munsters, and professional merchandise. But if there are only a few main streets there are many places of perhaps more interest. The Mardyke, long shaded walk of unique character, the quays of the winding channels, the Marina, lovely bank of the river, clean little roads of hilly suburbs. And many other streets, narrow, full of life. Some of these-where a meal cannot cost more than three cigarettes-are ramshackle and congested, and effort is being made to relieve these conditions. in new housing schemes. The largest scheme is high on the hill at Gurranebraher. It is known popularly as the Red City, apparently from the tile that is somebody's gift to Irish scenery. It is the conventional scheme, but clean and airy and the houses, 
commodious enough, have at least an inoffensive appearance, whereas some of the new and more pretentious ones in other parts of the city must be among the ugliest in Ireland. At Gurranebraher the Corporation has an unusual system whereby the rents vary with the incomes of the tenants. This seems admirable, but a labourer in regular employment who lives there felt that he was subsidising amenities that he did not want, much less his poorer neighbours. "The Government," he said, "laid it down that the houses must be this way and that way, and the Party said the people must have baths. Now look at me ! The last time I had a bath was in New York, and if I had one now I'd drown ! " He looked in excellent health and comfort, and indeed his grievance was not deep for he went on to a generous admission of his own good fortune. " Mind you, I'm not complaining. I'm only a working man with fifty-five shillings a week, but I live well. No one better. There isn't a day I don't sit down to meat, and I have an egg at my breakfast, and a pint at night ! " We began to think of one of Harold Frederic's characters who said forty years ago, "The Lord-Rowton houses are better, they say, but it seems to me that the real thing is that there shouldn't be all this immense number of people with only fourpence or fivepence in their pocket. That's where the real mischief lies ! " But, really, it was rather unfair that fine windy day to be suddenly confronted with problems that were in no way peculiar to Cork, for below was this interesting city with the river fading into the trees and the gentle slopes. Cork for its size seems to have a commendable number of churches, convents, schools, orphanages and hospitals. It has three of the very finest churches in Ireland-the church of Christ King, the Honan chapel, and St. Finbarre's Protestant cathedral. The first, the 
parish church at Turner's Cross, is perhaps the most striking, being ultramodern, pace the phrase, but modern in the best sense. Some people affect not to like it and do not hesitate to compare it with a concert hall, but it is a brave and beautiful church and they say the parishioners like it. In its golden light it is most reverent, and though it is built of great concrete beams and there are no pious columns to hide the altar, there may be much symbolism-the stepped walls are stairways to Heaven, the arms of Christ are stretched all-embracing above the doorways. Though it does not seem to have had definite influence as yet, it was a vital deviation in Irish church architecture as showing that the seemliness and beauty of a church -need not be confined to any form, however hallowed by custom. The Honan chapel is lovely in its quietness. It is small, in the style of the ancient Irish churches, and is well-known as a perfect example of that austere and beautiful form. It is built in the grounds of the University College, to the Glory of God and in Memory of the Honan Family for the Scholars and Students of Munster. There are wonderful windows, flooring, vestments, the greatest care having been taken to have the smallest detail perfect and true. The third church, St. Finbarre's, is a magnificent example of a French gothic that is rare in Ireland. It is large, with rich detail, and the ceiling and apse have now been brilliantly decorated. (It may be remarked here that there are numerous spellings of the name Finbar and on the one building you may find two spellings. For some reason the form Finbarre is chosen by or allocated to the Protestants, and apparently to emphasise the distinction this is sometimes pronounced Finbarry. It is interesting to note that Finbarry though incorrect is the form used on the old memorial stone at Gouganebarra). One 
St. Patrick Street
striking feature of these three churches is that the detail has been composed as carefully as the main fabric. Often a church has a fine fabric and fortuitous decoration, but in these three, stone, iron, glass and tile are all in lovely harmony. St. Mary's, the North Cathedral, the largest Catholic church, is a rather gloomy building, with stones that do not blend too happily, but it was a magnificent achievement in the dawn of Emancipation. There are a few fine statues, and a mural to the memory of John England, first bishop of Charleston, who died in 1841 and whose body rests " in a distant grave, wet with the tears of the orphan and the negro." In the south of the city is Old St. Finbar's, unadorned, built before Emancipation, its darkness and harshness telling of the struggle for religion. At Broad Lane is a similar old church, that of the Friars Minor. The parish church of SS. Peter and Paul, in a tiny street off Patrick Street, was designed by Welby Pugin ; it has handsome wood and a real baptistry. On Pope's Quay is the magnificent Dominican church of St. Mary's, with a shrine of the venerable Youghal statue of Our Lady of Graces ; here on a feastday was High Mass, with the Bishop presiding, and a procession bright against the grey of the quay, and a choir that sang a florid common but the proper in chant. On the height of Sunday's Well is the stately Vincentian church; the famous name of this neat hilly suburb is said to be a mistranslation through three languages of Lord's Well; the well itself, long associated with Cork, is now closed up. In Washington Street is the Augustinian church now being 
rebuilt with an exterior in fine stone, flush with the street in a singularly imaginative way. Up the river beside the Western Road is the bright and neat church of the Missioners of the Sacred Heart. Above the ships and the trains is the rich renaissance parish church of St. Patrick. In all these there is great diversity and interest, but appearance is nothing before the purpose of a Catholic church and the devotion of Cork people at all hours of the day is most edifying. And there are many other places to seize the interest. The Crawford Municipal Art School with its small but vigorous collection by Irish artists. The Mercy Hospital, that a century ago was the Mansion House, quietly situated at a comer of the river. The Private Library, one of the oldest in Ireland. The awesome Mental Hospital, high above the Blarney road. The Bon Secours Hospital, large and bright. The Protestant church of St. Ann at Shandon, where “Father Prout," the Rev. Francis Mahony, parish priest of Watergrasshill, lies beneath the bells he made famous ; there is a brilliant new window by McGoldrick in this church. Incidentally, Father Prout wrote “The Bells of Shandon" not to the air to which it is usually sung but to “The Groves of Blarney," an Irish air which had a literary vogue, Milliken writing an extravaganza to it, Moore “The Last Rose of Summer " and Flotow an aria. Collins Barracks, victory of Rebel Cork, higher than the tremendous Patrick's Hill, enthusiastic new soldiers drilling where the redcoats drilled. The City Hall, replacing the one destroyed in the Burning of Cork by the Forces of Law and Order in 1920, a magnificent classic edifice, splendidly planned and decorated. The Opera House, more commodious than beautiful, perhaps, with occasional music and play. The Courthouse, magnificent work of the Cork stone-masons. The Ford factory, amazing whatever its reactions on the 
economy of employment, where high wages are paid whatever the work, where you could eat your dinner off the floor, and where interest in the car is lost in wonder at the system of building it. The Carrigrohane autobahn. The Municipal Swimming Pool. The Coal Quay market with its elemental jumble of vegetables, old clothes, furniture, books, and all sorts of knick-knacks, many of the stalls so miserably stocked that it seems a great tribute to the industry of the poor people. Even the breweries, old, local, but holding their own; and the public-houses with their three stouts, old, dark, semi-rural inns and bright but tasteful new ones, with engaging names like “The Stack of Barley," “Paddy Buckley's." As is well-known, Cork is richly provided with schools and colleges. Chief of these is, of course, the College of the National University at Gilabbey, where St. Finbar is thought to have had his school, and over the main gate are the fine words “Ionad Bhairre Scoil na Mumhan " : Where Finbar taught let Munster learn. The buildings and grounds, though not immense, are impressive and attractive, with cloisters and quadrangles, anemones and ogham stones, and rosy apples protected by barbed wire from pre-occupied scholars. Cork professors are famous, and zeal has made many of the sections of the college overcrowded. Dairy Science is a special department of the college. (Indeed, hurriedly misreading the Bhairre for Bhainne, we thought that was the legend over the gate !) For men there is the Honan hostel and the Sisters of La Retraite du Sacre Coeur conduct a hostel for women. Across the city on a hill is the North Monastery, the great establishment of the Irish Christian Brothers, where hundreds of boys play in the sunlight and where Gerald Griffin lies in the simple grave of a brother. On Father Mathew Quay a great new School 
of Commerce has been erected. The college of the Presentation Brothers has long been famous. In Sunday's Well is the Good Shepherd industrial school ; here Little Nellie Organ, the child of four whose piety is said to have confirmed Pius X in his desire for Early Communion, died and many pray at her grave in the convent grounds. A few miles outside the city is the well-known state Munster Institute where young women receive excellent domestic and agricultural training. Towards the sea is Rochestown's Capuchin friary and college, a large but modest building set in pleasant wooded country, with swans on the little lake. Cork has many associations with the great Father Mathew. Though God knows we are not perfect yet, it is difficult for us now to realise the degradation from which he lifted the people and the debt which the country and the world owes him. Patrick Street is dominated by Foley's fine bronze statue of him, " Tribute from a grateful people,'' for in Cork he put his hand to his great work of Temperance. You can still see the modest house in Cove Street where he lived, the old store that was once his church, St. Joseph's cemetery where his body rests. He established this cemetery for the Catholics, who till then had none of their own, and he marked with a cross the spot in which he was buried twenty-six years later. The cemetery, still known by its old name of Botanic Gardens, is now rather bedraggled but has an interesting old-world appearance; there is a notable statue by Hogan, and an old notice still advertises a vault, " spacious, well-ventilated and perfectly dry, and approached by a handsome staircase." The Capuchin church of the Holy Trinity on Father Mathew Quay is a memorial to Father Mathew. It was erected by him when he was the superior of the friary, and the foundation stone was laid on his 
birthday in 1832. Owing to the various vicissitudes of the century the towers and spires were not completed until 1890, the centenary of Father Mathew's birth. With its unusual open front and its spire 200 feet high- the only Catholic spire in the city-the church is very striking. The Capuchins moved here from Blackamoor Lane in the vicinity of which they had been since their first church was established in 1637, a little church from which, a contemporary wrote, an incense spread through all the streets of Cork. All around the city presses the lovely sea and land of the south. Cóbh, with its great cathedral of St. Colman and the Irish flag over all the deep harbour. There is not a trickle now from the Wound of Ireland, though sad to think it is the misery of a whole world that staunches it. An old pensioner leaning over a wall brought us round the world in a few minutes : East Indies, the Yangtze, Freetown, Bahamas, Newport, Tahiti, St. Helena. Along the coast are little villages where despite all change the fishermen still fish and speak Irish. West is Blarney -show place perhaps, but its castle is ivied with our history; the kissing of the Stone is said to be of doubtful origin, but it is traditional now and indeed almost assumes the character of religious obligation. In the rich farming country they were cutting the corn. In the middle of the field was a large mound, overgrown with brambles, looming strangely from the golden ears. It was such an obstacle as any farmer would be glad to have out of his field, but it is not touched, for years ago someone tried to level it and " something happened." The young man on the reaper and binder knew the story. Men were hanged there in the time of Cromwell and the field is still known as Páirc an Chrochta, the Gallows Field; and the young man could tell after three hundred years how somebody said as the 
The Grand Parade
Cromwellians marched over the graves, '' It is easy for live dogs to walk on dead lions ! " Near by I saw the little farmstead where my mother was born, and Kiely's Inch where the sheep broke in the morning she was married, and the stepping stones across which she had to run to put them out. One may measure a building, a street, but who shall appraise the individual, though individuals form the town. This dark young man with attic features, his blue eyes half-closed, quietly gazing at the bright planes and drills in the hardware window- this dark girl with rounded chin and tooth gone, and restaurant-cap gaily awry, modest, serious, breaking in to sudden innocent smile - this steel-grey man, sturdy, ruddy, cap and scarf, pipe, on the two-horse lorry, his dog solemnly beside him. They are immeasurable and fleeting as the mullet flashing in the river, yet does the social city they fashion seem almost tangible. Not very maliciously the city and the people used to be described as '' God's own city and the divil's own people," but Cork people can respectably be credited with great energy and sagacity. In their own city their energy is only pleasantly evident, and the sagacity gives way to a charm that is almost naivete. Everybody is kind and obliging, even in the hotels. Everybody gives a nod or a traffic signal. There is a great air of liveliness and talk. One catches bits of neat and mellifluous dialogue. "Do you know what's a great thing on a hot day? A sour apple"- " It didn't make Cork win, then ! " " He gave a slap, 
and the hurley broke into fair halves. 'Twas no trouble to him, boy ! " " Her people were fit to be tied, thinking he wasn't good enough for her ! " "Do we keep the new time ? Faith, we can't keep the old time ! " " You see, Micheal, when you meet an officer you have to salute him, but if you haven't your cap on you don't let on to see him ! " The language of the few political communiques on the walls has a literary flavour : " Liberate the prisoners !" " Ruritanian flyingboat explodes the myth of Irish neutrality ! " "Montague surpasses Capulet." Few of the young women seem to be imitating Kansas City manicurists, but on the other hand they do not bother about their kerchiefs when entering a church. There is a story of a stranger in Cork who went to the opera and when he bought the programme found it was in Italian. He could not read it but he noticed that the people about him were reading it, and pointing out things in it to one another, and referring to it during the performance. When he got back to his hotel he told the Boots about it and asked him if all the people in Cork knew Italian. "Well, indeed they do not, sir," replied the boots. " Not the half of them ! " Though Cork has only one-sixth the population of Dublin it is by far the next largest city in the Twenty-six Counties. Over the last half-century its population has increased by only a few thousand ; it is now 81,000, with 4,000 more women than men. 18,000 men and 11,000 women are employed, and about 5,000 men and 1,000 women unemployed. In addition. 15,000 women are engaged in home duties. About 600 men and women are in religion. As well as commerce in agricultural produce and requirements, and the usual trade of a city, Cork manufactures hosiery, boots, rubber, motor cars, cloth, flour, paint, pottery, iron goods, and agricultural implements. Though there is 
a Dublin quip that Corkmen are migratory only 2,000 of the 108,000 who have come to Dublin from other parts of the Twenty-six Counties were born in Cork, whereas 1,000 Dublin people have gone to Cork. Altogether 19,000 people born in Cork now live elsewhere in the Twenty-six Counties while 24,000 born elsewhere now live in Cork, which apparently shows that with all its vitality Cork like all cities has to depend on rural areas for the maintenance of its population. Thirty-five years ago one person in every seven in Cork was a non-Catholic, but now the proportion is only one in twenty-five, about half the proportion for the Twenty-six Counties. The municipal borough measures about four square miles but the density of population is greater than in Dublin. Cork was the first city in Ireland to have the system of Manager and Corporation, and while there may be overwhelming arguments against the system as such, things seem to go on reasonably well. The borough is humanly large and does not appear to have the octopus ambitions of other places. The citizens are still persons and at the City Hall a shawl seems to be treated as courteously as a spat. The Corporation is an active and indispensable body and has some of the most courageous and individual public men in the country. In the Dáil Cork is represented by four deputies. Many historical figures have been associated with Cork, amongst them Mac Carthaigh, Spenser, Raleigh, Warbeck, Cromwell, James II, Marlborough, Scott, Thackeray, Moore, Father John O'Leary, O'Connell, Sarah Curran, Charlotte Bronte. Its roll of famous citizens is imposing, and includes, the churchmen :-Bishops Moylan, Delany, O'Callaghan and Cohalan, Monsignor Maguire and Dean Sexton ; the patriots :-Sheares, Crowley, MacCurtain, MacSwiney; the writers :-Lane, Prout, Croker, Milliken, Callanan, McCarthy, Knowles, Maguire, Maginn, Kelleher, Toma, Corkery; the artists :--Barry, Hogan, Madise ; the scientists :- Boyle, Collins, Windle. 
Many miles to the west, in lone Gouganebarra, where the Lee rises, Finbar lived before he came to the 
marshes where the river met the sea. To-day Gougane is desolate still among the mountains and Lough Eric is lost under the pavements. Yet must the saint feel for the city that grew about his monastery, and hear a prayer that its children be brought to the Statio Bene Fida Carinis of their arms, to Safe Harbour. 
