" Our lady 
of Graces," or the Youghal Madonna, is venerated in the Dominican Church, Cork. The group is cut in medium relief against a plain background and, according to the fashion for architectural ornament of the period, enshrined in a miniature oratory formed by a pointed arch over trefoil, cusped arcading. The Virgin sits, on a low throne without back, in the stylised S-shaped pose - a Gothic mannerism charming in its harmonious combination of lines and curves. She wears the fleur-de-lis crown, symbol of her divine maternity, over a shoulder-length veil. Her robe is girdled, and her mantle hanging lightly over the right shoulder is carried under the left arm, draped across the knees in the typical V-shaped fold and falls to the right, revealing the pointed slipper of her gracefully turned foot. The Child, clad in a full-length tunic stands on her left knee, supported by her left hand clasping His. He looks up at her face inclined gently towards Him ; His right hand is raised in blessing and in acknowledging her Mother of God and Queen of Heaven. Since the collapse of the Nestorian heresy in the fifth century, the enthroned Virgin presenting her Child to the world became in art the popular expression of the doctrine of the Incarnation-the logical statement of the human and divine natures in the person of Christ. " Our Lady of Graces " illustrates the French, fourteenth century development of that expression. The ivory is much worn by time and by the reverent kissing and touching of the faithful for hundreds of years, especially the right side of the Madonna's face and her right hand ; but the modelling of the figures, even the Virgin's neck, is well done and the treatment of the draperies graceful. The group is beautiful, not only in the happy composition and skilful execution of lines and curves, but especially in expressing that other beauty, loved and sought by the Church in art, which maintains the supremacy of the spirit over matter. The unknown artist of the Youghal Madonna is true to the tradition of the Gothic figure-workers in ivory who by their fine conception and reverent approach achieved permanent distinction in their work. A delicate expression lingers about these features worn by the devout caressing of generations; a restrained attitude of body, a graceful but lively gesture of the hand. These reveal in inanimate ivory something of the harmony between Mother and Son. The group of Virgin and Child presents the idea of joy in the contemplation of what is perfect. The ivory has become discoloured a light brown and there is a crack in the upper left corner. Both sides of the leaf show the spaces for the hinges and the rust marks of the nails which originally held the side and folding panels. These were possibly plain or may have been carved with angels. They would have folded over and closed to form a small cabinet. Carved ivory cabinets, diptychs, triptychs and shrines-a Christian adaptation and development of the Roman consular diptych-were popular in the Middle Ages and much used not only for ub lic religious services but also for 
private devotions. They were decorative, often exquisitely so, masterpieces of miniature carving painted and gilded, set under traceried Gothic arches and corbelled spires. They were compact, easily carried and were especially cherished by travellers and pilgrims who in those ages of faith seldom set out on journeys that were often long and dangerous without some sacred object. Among the remaining ancient Madonnas preserved in Ireland which still receive the veneration of the public, " Our Lady of Graces" is, as far as I am aware, the only existing example in carved ivory. It is earlier than the oak statue of " Our Lady of Dublin " in the Carmelite Church, Whitefriar Street, or the Waterford, Limerick and Galway Madonnas preserved by the Dominican Fathers. (These four statues will be dealt with in future articles). Hitherto all written accounts of the Youghal Madonna repeat the ascription that it is of " Italian -fifteenth century workmanship." By the -fifteenth century the favourite pose for presenting the enthroned Virgin and Child in Italian art had changed much from the Gothic development of Romanesque. Examples in monumental sculpture, in marble and terra-cotta from the masters of that time, from della Robbia, Verrocchio, Sequace de Mino, Donatello and the great wood carver, della Quercia, illustrate the far reaching change. In the Italian Quattrocento the enthroned Virgin no longer takes the stylised Gothic pose ; she sits naturally, knees loosely apart, draperies and head veil often complicated. She usually clasps the Bambino towards her or raises His head to hers-a fully modelled infant, but graver far than the vivacious, smiling, if older child of the former century. Mother and Child are usually nimbused ; the Virgin has become a careful, tender mother who while she lacks the elegance and extreme grace of the fourteenth century French Madonna, shows the rapidly increasing tendency towards naturalism, towards working from the living model -and the introduction of portraiture in religious subjects. For a very beautiful example of an Italian fifteenth century carved ivory Madonna and Child which may be compared and contrasted with the Youghal Madonna see in Emile Molinier' s Ivoires, Histoire Générale des Arts Appliques, plate xxi, the upper central panel of a fifteenth century Florentine triptych excellent in design and technique. Italian carved ivory fourteenth century triptychs are rare. (Although by the end of the century the Italians had developed an original style of carving on narrow strips of bone, framed in tarsia borders.) But as ivory work everywhere followed the same principles and sentiments as monumental sculpture, the larger figure work of the Italian Trecento illustrates the genera] treatment and feeling of the time. The enthroned Madonna of the Italian Trecento retains something of the Roman matron, rigid, heavier featured, draperies classical in style but clumsier in execution than those of the French Madonna of the same period. See in Venturi's Scultura del Trecento, fig. 423, the rigid, oblong-faced Virgin of the Camposanto Tabernacle ; also the solid rather heavy Madonnas from the Eastern and Roman doors of the Archaeological Museum, Milan, illustrated in the same volume, figs. 463 and 464; also fig. 466. Of the three centuries, thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth, which comprise the Middle Ages in art, the fourteenth has furnished the majority of finer carved ivories preserved in museums and private collections; of these nearly all are French. Many of them are illustrated in the South Kensington and British Museum catalogues, in the Spitzer Collection and in Molinier's and Maskell's works. A beautiful example and interesting comparison in pose and treatment with the Youghal Madonna is the enthroned Virgin from the Spitzer Collection, Vol. I., Plate XV. See also the French fourteenth century diptych, from the South Kensington Museum, illustrated in Maskell's Ivories, Plate XXXIV. And for another closely resembling but rather earlier Virgin see Joseph Destree's Catalogue des Ivoires, p. 51, No. XIV. There the Virgin's pose is straighter, stiffer ; the Child standing on His mother's knee leans forward rather than back as in the Youghal group ; His tunic is fuller and His right hand rests upon her breast. 
II 
We have no facts as to the origin of the Youghal Madonna-the triptych leaf, entitled " Our Lady of Graces." and only a few brief references to its history. We know that it was venerated in Youghal when Walter Raleigh was mayor of that town; that it was saved by reverent hands and cherished by fervent hearts throughout the penal days; that worn and partly damaged it has survived each successive wave of persecution until it has come once more into its own, to be honoured in public, to receive in the homage and prayers of the faithful a continued acknowledgement of Mary's unfailing help and intercession. Early in the seventeenth century the story of the Madonna's " discovery" was established in Youghal tradition and was published for the first time, in Paris in 1653 by the celebrated Angevin traveller, Le Sieur Boullaye le Gouz, in his travel book, Voyages et Observations. In the summer of 1644 Le Gouz spent two months in Ireland during which he visited Youghal. " In the Dominican convent," he writes, " there was an image of the Virgin formerly held in the greatest reverence in Ireland which arrived there in a miraculous manner. The tide carried a piece of wood into the site of the town which several fishermen tried to carry off, the wood being rare in the country, but they could not move it ; they harnessed ten horses to it without effect ; the reflux of the tide brought it near the Dominican convent; two monks raised it on their shoulders and put it in the courtyard of the convent; and the Prior had in the night a vision that the image of the Mother of God, Virgin of Great Power, was in this piece of wood; which was found there. So say the Catholics who have still a great devotion towards it; but the Dominicans having been persecuted by the English settlers, carried it elsewhere." The story of the '' discovery '' recorded by Le Gouz was popular and still told with little variation during the last century round the Youghal firesides. In Volume II of the Ulster Journal of Archaeology for 1854, the Reverend Samuel Hayman, Rector of Youghal, writing on the Madonna, refers to a manuscript attributed to a local seanchaidhe, named Savage. In the manuscript among other pencil sketches was one of the entrance to Youghal harbour with a large tree uptorn by the roots ·lying on the sand and was entitled : " The Miraculous Tree found at the Warren, fifteenth century." Hayman quotes the seanchaidhe: '' This is the tree that was spoken of to have the picture of the Blessed Virgin in it. It was about six or seven inches long. I have not seen it. My sister had it in her hand. She told me of it ; and the persons that had it, told her, that was the one. It was always kept in the North Abbey that was the Dominican friary." 
The story-teller's use of the word " picture " is interesting ; he had not seen the Madonna but he knew that it was not a statuette. Efforts to trace this valuable manuscript, quoted by Hayman, have failed but there is still at Youghal a family named Savage who may well be his descendants. The Dominican friary mentioned was the convent at Youghal founded in 1268 by the Viceroy, Sir Thomas Fitzgerald, whose family built seven other Dominican houses in Ireland as well as the Louvain foundation and who for many generations in their close association with the history of Cork and Kerry were patrons and generous benefactors of the Order of Preachers. The first upheaval in the religious life at Youghal Abbey came with the reign of Henry VIII and the monastic confiscations, when in August, 1542, the Lord Deputy ordered the convent to be dissolved. The following June it was granted to an army man, William Walsh, to hold for the Crown. During a quiet spell the monks returned. In 1557 they had repaired the monastery and were once more leading a life of regular observance. In 1565 they even managed to hold a Chapter secretly. A little later times grew worse. In 1581 the abbey was once more granted to Walsh; in 1584 to a soldier, John Thickpenny, and finally in 1587 to Sir Walter Raleigh, mayor of the town. In that year the storm that thrice expelled the monks broke about the abbey in earnest ; Raleigh ordered the destruction of the building. The work was carried out according to plan, but the horror caused among the general public by the act of wanton spoliation and their belief in Heaven's vengeance is illustrated by an old account of the destruction in Theatrum Catholicae et Protestanticae Religionis, 1620 : '' An Englishman breaking down the monastrie of St. Dominiques in Youghill fell dead from the toppe of the church, all his limmes being broken. Also three soldiers which did cast down and burne the holye rood of that monastrie died within ane senight after they had done it. The first died of madness ; the second was eaten by vermin ; the third was slain by the seneechal of the Earl of Desmond." " The miraculous image of the Virgin which made the monastery of Youghal famous throughout Europe," wrote Pope Hennessy in 1783, "was saved from Raleigh and his soldiers by the daughter of one of the Geraldines whom he had pursued.” This lady, Honor Fitzgerald (whose identity has never been definitely established) had a silver-gilt shrine made to hold the remaining portion of the triptych - the central leaf on which the Madonna and Child are carved. It has folding doors 
similar in form to the original ivory panels which had come off or were perhaps torn off during the destruction of the Abbey. The shrine (shown above [note: The writer is greatly indebted to the Rev. Father Byrnes, Prior of St. Mary's, Cork, to Professor S. P. Ó Riordain, Cork, and to Mr. Ardle of the National Museum for their help in connection with the photographs. 
Lower central panel of carved ivory triptych ; French, 14th century. From the Spitzer Collection, Vol. I. Plate XV.]) is inscribed : Orate pro anima Onoriae filiae Jacobi de Geraldinis quae me fieri fecit, anno Domini 1617. 
Certain writers, including the late Dr. Charles Ronayne of Youghal, believe that Honor Fitzgerald was the daughter of Sir James, younger brother to Gerald the fifteenth Earl, who was executed at Cork in 1580, for his part in the Munster Rising. Burke and Lodge say that he was married to Honor, daughter of the seventh MacCarthy Reagh. O'Daly states that he was executed while little more than a boy, and does not mention his marriage. Others, including Gibson the Cork historian, state that Honor was the daughter of James, known as the Súgán or Sham Earl, who was taken prisoner in 1601 and died in the Tower of London some years later. It is not clear however that James Fitzgerald had any daughter. Nor is there any record in the pedigree of the Earls of Desmond as given in the William Betham MS. that James the sixteenth Earl had a daughter, Honor. Therefore it appears most probable that " Onoria, filia Jacobi de Geraldinis " was no other than Honor, only daughter of James Fitzmaurice Fitzgerald, " The Famous Rebel," cousin germain to Gerald the fifteenth Earl of Desmond and chosen leader of the Munster Rising. Fitzmaurice has been described as a courteous, valiant man, wide travelled and deeply religious whose courage roused the sympathy of French and Spanish kings and inspired the Pope to grant support in men and arms for the religious war in Ireland ; his untimely death in 1579 lost to the cause the one real leader, the noblest of the Geraldines. Early in the seventeenth century and during the first interval of peace the monks had once more returned and repaired their abbey. Provincial records for that period prove that the Madonna was then venerated. In 1639 the register of the Dominican Order states that the dedication of the abbey in Youghal had been changed from that of " The Holy Cross " to that of " Our Lady of Graces" because of the numerous graces and favours obtained through the Madonna formerly known as Our Lady of Youghal. A silver chalice still treasured by the Dominican Fathers at their convent, St. Mary's, Cork, is inscribed : Pertinet ad Conventum Deiparae Gratiarum Yeoghall, 1632. 
Father O'Heyne writing from Louvain in 1706 on the Irish Dominican convents refers to the " miraculosa statua Beatissimce Virginis Marice " at Youghal. In 1756 Dr. Burke in his Hibernia Dominicana, drawn from earlier sources, writes that the devout thronged from all parts to the shrine for purposes of prayer:" ex universis Hiberniae partibus confluere solebant Christifideles religionis et voti causa." The shrine became a celebrated place of pilgrimage. The rich and the charitable and those who had received favours through the intercession of Our Lady, offered so many and such rich offerings that the Provincial of the Dominicans considered them too much for a single establishment and devoted them to the general support of the clergy in Ireland. Dissatisfaction at this was expressed in an appeal to Rome against his decision. At a General Chapter of the Order held in Rome in 1644 an order was passed under the fifty-sixth Master of the Dominicans, Thomas of Cremona: " We apply all the alms which are offered at the most venerated Image of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Youghal, to the use of the monastery itself, nor can the Provincial in future dispose of them in any other way." In the same year, 1644, Le Gouz wrote that the Dominicans had carried the image for safety elsewhere. But it is possible that it had then for a time at least been returned, for, with the first victories of the Confederate forces the Catholic religion was in many places once more practised openly, Mass celebrated in public and the suppressed Orders re-established. The spell of liberty was short-lived. With the departure of Rinucinni, and the tragic death of O'Neill, Catholic Ireland was left an easy prey to Cromwell's campaign of extermination. For the duration of those dark years when monasteries and chapels were reduced to smoking ruins, and religious houses sacked and swept out of existence, we know nothing of the Youghal Madonna nor for the subsequent periods of intermittent persecution from the Popish Plot scare to that final blow, the General Exile of 1698. Under the banishment edict of that year the Youghal Fathers were again compelled to leave the monastery to which they had persistently returned. On that occasion they entrusted the Madonna to a Catholic gentleman, Sir John Hore of Shandon Castle, Co. Waterford, as O'Heyne relates :
Quam audivi relictam sub nupero exilio in manibus D. Joannis Hore, Catholici viventis in illo territorio. 
Some of the Fathers managed to remain in hiding about the district but there is no record that they lived in community again until 1756 when once more we find the Madonna at Youghal, in the safe keeping of Prior Thomas O'Kelly. The last of the Dominicans connected with the Youghal foundation was Father Cunningham who died between 1785 and 1789. In 1823 when Father Russell, O.P., returned from Lisbon to the convent in Dominick Street, Cork, he found stowed away in an old safe three treasured relics ; a black-letter copy of the Bible printed in Strasbourg and dated 1481, the Youghal silver chalice dated 1632, and the triptych leaf in its silver shrine. These were no doubt transferred from Youghal to Cork in accordance with a rule of the Order 
that in case of danger valued objects should be removed to the nearest convent. 
To-day Our Lady of Graces has found a permanent place of veneration in the Dominican Church, Pope's Quay, Cork. A light burns constantly before the much-worn little carving now encased in a large, gilded and engraved shrine, a votive offering for a cure. On Saturday nights especially, great crowds fill the Chapel of the Rosary to seek the powerful intercession of ' Our Lady of Graces,' the Madonna of Youghal. 
St. Mary's Dominican Church, Cork
