THE STATUE HIGH above the Lady Altar in the Carmelite Church, Whitefriars' Street, Dublin, an archaic but young Madonna looks down serenely from her gilded pedestal and holds her Child as though presenting Him to the people. Strangers look up at her dark Gothic figure against the background of new and glittering mosaic and wonder who she is. Some call her the Black Madonna, as the oak from which she is carved is stained dark brown. But to the Dublin workers who know her and pray beside her, she is " Our Lady of Dublin." They know nothing of her place in the history of art or even of her own history ; but they look to her as one who has shared the trials and sufferings of their city. They realise that she is something that has survived from the days of faith that went before. In style the Madonna is late fifteenth or early sixteenth century and belongs to a period when the national spirit, the Gaelic language and culture were strong ; when native and orman chieftains shared the lordships of the country. The abbeys were great civilising centres. The Brehons gave the laws and every great man had his troop of gallowglass and his family poet. The Kildares were in power. All seemed well. The proportions of the figure are rather short and thick-set. The face is grave and serene rather than beautiful. Smooth locks curl down each side of the neck and frame features suggestive of fifteenth century sculpture. 
The Madonna wears fifteenth century dress. Her frock is tight-fitting and has the popular V shaped inset at the neck beneath a low-cut square. It is a style seen everywhere in the art of the period. Country women in the Grimiani Breviary illustrations wear the costume brightly illuminated. Virgin saints as well as kneeling donors in Van Eyck's and the Flemish panel paintings have similar dresses in rich, transparent hues. German wood and copper plate engravers copy the style and translate the colours into subtle shades of black and white. In the carved retables and single figures of the period, the sculptors of both countries repeat the fashion in their own medium of wood or stone. Her mantle is wide and loose sleeved and arranged in such a way as to accentuate her sloping shoulders. The right side falls in graceful pleats. The left portion is draped beneath the Child and across the front in a decorative array of sharp angled folds. The idea is conveyed of movement in stiff silk or linen suddenly hardened into wood. The Child, as usual in late Gothic art, is almost naked. He has curly hair, a baby face and round, well modelled limbs. He leans across His mother's arm ; and in His seeming effort to rise suggests the growing agility of a one year old boy. His right hand grasps the ripe pomegranate of Hope- a favourite symbol of Gothic Madonna groups. His left hand is extended as though to hold a sceptre ; but as this arm has been completely restored from the shoulder it is difficult to guess the original gesture. His left 
OUR LADY OF DUBLIN 3 
foot and the Virgin's right hand which holds it, are partly broken. The group is well modelled and the treatment of the drapery skilful. And although the carving lacks a high perfection of finish, as the statue was intended to be painted, the work has evidently been done by a sculptor familiar with his medium of tough oak. The Madonna is strongly remini cent of the figures in the Henry VII Chapel, Westminster- The King' fausoleum, named in the sixteenth century, for its beauty " The Miracle of the World." Unfortunately the Virgin there has b en remov d. But in some of the figures that remain we can see a definite relation to the Dublin Madonna. The Dublin and We tminster figures have similar proportions. They have the same reverent and serene expre ion. They have a similar treatment of the hair by incised lines and of the draperies by long, straight pleats and broken-edged, zig-zag fold . These are characteristics of Engli h fifteenth century work and especially of Henry VII's masons, whose names even in those days of anonymity were c nsidered worthy of record. If the Dublin Madonna is not a product of their school it is at least safe to say that it was carved by an artist familiar with their work, possibly by one who had spent some time in their workshop. Irish masons ometimes worked in England. In the thirteenth century William of Ireland carved statues of Queen Eleanor for the famous Hardingstone Cross. By comparing the Dublin Madonna with some of the Westminster figures, and then with French and German Madonnas of the same period, differences will be observed. The English faces are more naive and placid. The French and German sweeter or more humani tic. The treatment of the drapery in all three is different. 
DURER'S INFLUENCE 
George Petrie, writing about the Dublin Madonna in 1832, ascribed the carving to Albrecht Diirer's school and even sugge ts it as not unlikely to be an earlywork of Di.irer himself. Alas ! the much disputed question as to whether Di.ircr ever executed any plastic work of art still remains unanswered. Many pieces have been ascribed to him. ome of them bear his well-known monogram and have fetched huge prices at the salerooms. But modem scholarship goes to show that he never xecuted them himself. Thausing, his mo t accurate biographer, admit that he upervised certain wellknown wood carvings but he regards all plastic works ascribed to him as purious. On both technical and intellectual grounds D iirer ranks as the most celebrated of German artists. He was a good painter; but he was the greatest and most influential of all designers and engravers of wood and copper plMe. Even to-day serious students of engraving find a tudy of his work the greatest. of all masters. It is true that the wood sculptors of his time drew their inspiration from the contemporary masters of engraving and etching; from Diirer, Schongauer, Burkmair and the Behans. The Dublin Madonna belongs to Diirer's period but there is not sufficient resemblance between it and any of Diirer's Madonnas, drawn or engraved, to suggest that it has been inspired by his work. Diirer's " Conceptions " and standing Madonnas often take a similar pose- but that was the ace pted late Gothic pose. His faces and figures are more homely and mature. His modelling is more vigorous and robust and his treatment of the draperies more voluminous. Sometimes the sculptors were inspired directly from he engravers • and. some-' 
84 THE CAP UCHIN ANNUAL 
times indirectly through the early Flemish and German masters of painting. Very often the practice was not merely a case of inspiration but of actual copying. They copied the composition of the subject, the arrangement of the draperies, the fashion of a mantle, veil or head-dress. Sometimes they copied the actual model. Even the greatest Gennan wood sculptors, Riemenschneider, Veit Stoss and Haguenauer, were indebted to the engraver not only for ideas, but whole panels of their most admired carved retables were direct copies from copper plate or wood engraving prints. The carved panels of Rio.::menschneider's famous altarpiece in the Munich Museum are said to be a direct copy from Di.irer's engraving " The Beheading of John the Baptist." His altarpiece in the Marienkirche at Salzwedel is taken from a chongauer etching and the Creglingen altarpiece ascribed to him is after Van Eyck's painting, " The Adoration of the Lamb." There was little speciali ation in the arts. Painters, engravers, sculptors were intimately connected with and dependent on each other. Painters were also engravers, etchers, goldsmiths, bronze casters and sculptors in stone, wood or ivory. The artistic training of the time encouraged the system of translating ma terpieces from one medium to another. Veit Stoss, the most celebrated German wood sculptor of Gothic times, was almost as prolific in etched work. The central panel of his altarpiece in Cracow is a reproduction of one of his own etchings. 
MEDii£V AL POLYCHROME 
The Dublin Madonna shows no indication of German carving or inspiration ; but if there is any indirect foreign influence behind the work it surely comes from the early Flemish and Cologne 
masters who left their impre s on so much of western European art. The Madonna retains much of her original beauty of line and something of her expression but how very different she must have looked, when, in all her magnificence, she left the hands of the medireval painter and gilder who invariably finished the work of the sculptor. Her mantle was blue. We are certain of that - a vivid turquoise blue, spangled with stars or flowers of gold. But that is all that we can tell from the narrow treaks of blue and gold paint that still linger about the inmost crevices of her deeply carved cloak. Imagination, based on the knowledge of medireval polychrome can try to conjure up a picture of the Madonna as she was. Her grave face was wanned to the breath and bloom of life by delicate flesh painting. Her hair rippled a stream of glossy gold. Her robe contrasted with her mantle and richly ornamented and diapered, blended into a harmonious flow of colour. The Child with rosy limbs and tight, gilded curls assumed the hues and semblance of life. All medireval sculpture was coloured. Wood, metal, ivory and even stone statues high up in their grey niches blazed with the brilliance of paint and gold. The art of polychromed statuary came westward from the great Asiatic races who used enamel as the basis of their colours. The Egyptians loved vivid reds and yellows and avoided light and shade. The Medes and Persians in their turn followed the Babylonians and Assyrians. Later on the Greeks developed sculpture and enhanced their work by paint. Up on the green Acropolis the ivory plated statues of Phidias glittered with gems and gold. The system finally came to Byzantium and thence through Rome reached western Europe. The people of the Middle Ages wor sombr hues them
OUR LADY OF DUBL1N 5 
Our Lady of Dublin 
selves ; but in their churches they insisted on bright colours. In our day, the magic of light filtering through stained glass is the sole relic of the glowing atmosphere of Gothic churches. During the Reformation, colour in the House of God became tabu. In the Netherlands whole churches were whitewashed. Everywhere statues that escaped the wanton destruction of fire, water or 
hammer blows, were covered with white pigment or distemper. uch was the fate of the Dublin Madonna. At some time, probably in the middle of the sixteenth century, the statue was plastered from head to foot with white paint. For nearly four hundred years it remained camouflaged, its fine features coarsened, its beautiful polychrome hidden, forgotten and unsuspected. In I9I5 the Carmelite Fathers, who had rescued the statue from inevitable destruction, decided that the ugly white paint should be removed. They wished that the Madonna might appear with something of her original beauty when set up above the altar which they dedicated especially to her under the title "Our Lady of Dublin." The art of polychrome was long since dead and almost forgotten and unknown. Who would dream that any beauty other than the grain of the carved oak lay beneath the dingy white paint of an old and battered Madonna saved from the image breaker ? In the efforts to remove the plaster, the underlying polychrome also came away. The greater number of Reformationpainted statues have had a similar fate. 
ST. MARY'S ABBEY 
For several centuries, Dublin tradition has held that the Madonna figure came from St. Mary's Cistercian Abbey on the north Liffey bank. There, in quiet meadows beyond the restless city, the White Monks served God by prayer and manual labour. In the fields they tilled the stubborn earth and planted corn and vegetables for their needs and for those they tended-poor scholars, orphans, the sick and infirm. In the workshops they carved wood and stone for building and fashioned tiles of glazed clay. In the cells they toiled, transcribing and illuminating sacred books. The 
86 T HE CAPUCHIN ANNUAL 
inftuence of those early miniaturists on Gothic art and on the most precious in all art cannot be forgotten. Throughout the Middle Ages St. Mary's grew and spread and prospered. Rich lands and many houses were acquired, harbour and fishing rights bestowed. In the stronghold above the rocks at Bullock, overseas guests were welcomed with the prescribed hilari et jucundo. At the pier below, their ships unloaded choice French wines or stood ready to bear student monks to the Oxford schools or the Abbot to his conference at the mother-house at Citeaux- for many years western Europe's centre of culture. By personal labour and asceticism the Cistercians organised a vast centre of hospitality, industry and learning. The abbots ranked as Peers. The Abbey became the Saint Denis of Ireland- a world of wealth and power devoted to spiritual and social services. Within its Gothic walls the Viceroy and English guests of honour were entertained. There, the parliament and Privy Council sometimes met. There, in the vaulted Chapter House, Silken Thomas, attended by his glittering knights, made the dramatic surrender of his sword and brought about the tragic downfall of the great House of Kildare. With the power of the Geraldines broken the way was paved for " religious reform " and a new subjugation of Ireland. St. Mary's maintained magnificence to the end ; but wealth and grandeur never impinged on the Citeaux Rule of charity and religious simplicity. "Verily we are but stewards or purveyors of other men's uses," wrote Abbot Laundy to the Lord Privy Seal, Thomas Cromwell, shortly before the confiscation, " for the King's honour keeping hospitality and many poor men, scholars and orphans." It was one of the last houses to go. All efforts had been made to save it. The new Deputy, Lord Leonard Grey, who 
preferred the Abbey's quiet to his own grim castle at Maynooth, pleaded that St. Mary's, as one of six religious houses, should stand, " for the common weal of the land and the King's honour and . profit." "The said house of St. Mary's,'' he wrote in a despatch to Thomas Cromwell, "hath been the common resort of all such of reputation as hath repaired hither out of England. Also, at every hosting, raid and journey the said Houses on their proper costs do find as many men of arms as they are appointed by the King's Deputy and Council for the same. And if they were suppressed, the profit of them should scarcely find so many men of war according to the rate of the King's wages." The confiscation of the Abbey had been already decided. Henry's avarice dared not be gainsaid. On October 28th, 1539, Abbot Laundy was compelled to surrender St. Mary's and all its vast possessions to the King. '' The way and manner of the suppression of this very noble monastery was a very sad spectacle to God and man," wrote Brother Hartry a hundred years later. The King reserved the Abbey Church for himself and used it as a storehouse for his artillery and war materials. Throughout the century following the dissolution, Mary's Abbey changed hands several times. In 1543 the Earl of Desmond was granted a lease. He had just made his submission to the King; the Abbey served as a convenient residence for the Earl and his retinue during the parliamentary session. Forty years later, Ormonde, the Queen's favourite, was given the site. He vvas the first of his line to conform to the new religion. To his period of possession belongs the tradition that the Madonna figure was condemned to be burned. " One half of it was actually burned," writes Petrie, " the other half was carried 
OUR LADY OF DUBLIN 87 
by some devout or friendly hand to a neighbouring inn yard, where with the face buried in the ground and the hollow trunk appearing uppermost, it was appropriated for concealment and safety to the ignoble purpose of a hog-trough." A sharp rebuke from the King stung Archbishop Browne to iconoclastic action. Dublin's first "reformed " Archbishop, Henry's own nominee, hastened to make good his obvious half-heartedness in the face of opposition. The necessary Acts were rushed through a prepared parliament. The wholesale destruction of shrines and images followed close upon the suppre sion of the religious houses and was as thoroughly carried out. " They burned and broke the famous images, shrines and relics of England and Ireland," wrote the Four Masters. " T);).ey broke the monasteries. They sold their roofs and bells, so that there was not a monastery from Aran of the Saints to the Iccian Sea (the English Channel) that was not broken or shattered except only a few in Ireland which escaped the notice and attention of the English. " The Four Masters' pathetic reference to the burning of the shrine at Trim and of the famou Bachall Iosa is the death knell of all that was beautiful in the Irish churches, of all that was reve~ed in the hearts of the people soon to be deprived of everything they possessed. It is not easy to tell whether Our Lady of Dublin was actually consigned to the flames and saved at the last minute as Petrie says. To-day a modern board is fixed over the hollow back of the statue; but wherever the edges appear on each side of the board there is no trace of burning on the wood. Medic.eval wood sculptors gouged out the back of their statues, especially life-size figures, for two reasons. The hollowing out reduced the weight ; it was also a safeguard against the wood cracking. It is probably true that the statue was 
used as a hog-trough. That was but one of the ignominious uses to which sacred objects were put. In England, parish registers and churchwardens' accounts record the history of the system that had its grim sequel in Ireland. Altar stones and fonts were broken and defaced, turned into cistern bottoms, set into fire hearths, used for mending walls or laid in highways. The wood of Rood screens that escaped destruction was pressed into service for bridge rails, window frames, weavers' looms and wellposts. Monastic libraries were broken up, sacred bells rang at horses' heads, and swine drank out of holy water fonts. 
MARY'S LANE CHAPEL 
We shall never know whether the statue of Our Lady of Dublin served as a hog-trough. If it did, the thick Reformation plaster helped to keep the wood from decomposing. We only know that the statue is one of the few pieces of wood-sculpture that has survived in Ireland. We also know that two hundred years after the dissolution of St. Mary's Abbey the Madonna was venerated in a poor Caroline chapel, called Mary's Lane Chapel, built not far from the old Abbey. Within the span of two centuries, Dublin had changed much. Its dark walls and guardian gates no longer cramped an Anglo-Norman city. New buildings were growing up in Ostmans' Town and Hogges Greene. New bridges spanned the murky river, one of them built with cut stone from Mary's Abbey. The religious life of the city had to all appearance been completely crushed. The abbeys and many of the oldest churches were black and roofless ruins. Both cathedrals, despoiled of riches and of colour, were in Protestant hands. Priests and teachers were hunted. Catholics led 
THE CAPUCHIN AN UAL 
a precarious existence, their religious freedom dependent on the connivance of friendly viceroys. When possible they heard Mass within the humble walls of back rooms, down side lanes and in poor streets. In 1630, St. Michan's, the oldest parish in Dublin, was still without a chapel. But the Catholic descendants of the old Villa Ostmanorum remained true to the faith fostered for centuries by the White Monks of St. Mary's. With the Restoration in 1660 public religious services were grudgingly permitted. These were mostly held in poor, cheap chapels- cinderella sisters to the beautiful Gothic churches- born in poverty and de tined to struggle through a new, harsh age. uch was the first post-Reformation chapel of St. Michan's. It was built about 1700 amid a network of humble houses and obscure lanes that had grown out of the ashes of t. Mary's Abbey. It became knovvn as Mary's Lane Chapel because it faced on to Mary's Lane and stood within the angle formed by the south end of that lane and the north-west comer of Bull Lane. To-day blocks of artisans' flats- St. Michan's Housecover the site. " In Mary's Lane,'' writes the anonymous author of an Egerton manuscript dated 1749, " is a parochial chapel whose jurisdiction extends from one side of Boot Lane to one side of Church Street. It is a large and irregular building. On the Epistle side of the altar stands a large image of the Blessed Virgin with Jesus in her arms, carved in wood ; which statue before the dissolution belonged to St. Mary's Abbey." The J esuit Fathers who toiled among the poor of that district and served Mary's Lane Chapel for over a hundred years must have known and revered that statue. Teresa Mulally, Dublin's little-known holy woman, took there her 
Our Lady and Divin Child Albrech t Dtirer 
schocrt-girls to Mass and instruction, and there they prayed for tl1e then precarious future of Catholic education. In 1816 when a new parish church was erected, Mary's Lane was abandoned as a church and wa henceforth used as a school. The statue of Our Lady was abandoned too. Perhaps it was thought too old and battered for the new parish church. Perhaps they thought to keep it where it stood that the children grouped about it might learn their catechism at its feet. Howbeit, it remained there, we are told, for some years. After that it was sent to a second-hand shop in Capel Street. 
OUR LADY 6F DUBLlN S9 
ln 1824 Father John Spratt, a distinguished member of the Carmelite Order, saw the statue in the shop window. He bought it for a small sum. The figure was in a partly mutilated condition but he had it repaired. In 1827 the Carmelites, under Father Spratt, were able to return to the site of their original thirteenth century foundation, from which they had been expelled about the same time as the dissolution of Mary's Abbey. In their new church in Wh.itefriars' Street, they placed the repaired Madonna on the Epistle side of the altar- in the same position as it had occupied in Mary's Lane. A little later a new chapel there was richly decorated and dedicated to Our Lady of Dublin. To-day it is one of the city's most popular shrines. 
THE CROWN 
Among the traditions associated with the statue is that the silver coronet was used to crown Lambert Simnel in 1487. It is true that Champfleury, Abbot of t. Mary's, was a Yorkist and one of the most prominent partisans in Simnel's cause. The Romance of the White Rose died hard in Ireland. The whole country, both Gaelic and orman, save Waterford and the Butler towns, looked on the Pretender as their lawful king. To them he was the son of their " own Dublin born Clarence " and grandson of Duke Richard to whom their fathers had given fealty and love. The Great Earl had no doubts about him ; the AngloIrish nobles welcomed him; the Archbishops of Armagh and Dublin paid him homage as a king. But there is no evidence that the crown used for his coronation came from Mary's Abbey. The abbey stood in solitude, far away from the Hurdle Ford, the only bridge between the North Bank and the city. 
It would seem strange to go beyond the walls to look for an improvised crown if there were any other within and close to the place of ceremony. The earliest reference to Simnel's crown is contained in the preface to a contemporary poem from Waterford. The old manuscript, The Mayor of Waterford's Letter, was written shortly after the coronation, and says : " The crowne they tooke off the head of Our Lady of Damascus and clapte it on the boy's head." It would seem that the statue so casually referred to, was well-known. Also, as the city's Eastern Gate was commonly called Dames' Gate or Damask Gate, it would seem that the crown was believed to have come from that quarter. Walter Harris states that until the Reformation an image of the Blessed Virgin stood above Dames Gate and that he himself had seen its empty niche of stone. The next reference to Simnel's crown is contained in Ware's Rerum Hibernicarum Annales, published in 1664-one hundred and seventy years after the coronation. We do not know Ware's authority but if he lacked documentary evidence he would have the Catholic tradition direct from the Gaelic historiographer who always lived with him, in Castle Street-p1obably from the great Duald Mac Firbish himself. Under an entry for the year 1487, Ware describes the coronation of the organmaker's son, who for a few weeks reigned as king, was applauded through the Dublin streets, feasted in the Castle, honoured by nobles, clergy and people, accepted even by Henry Tudor's deputy, the Great Earl of Kildare. Lambert Simnel was good-looking and well-mannered. He was about the same age as the real Earl of Warwick, Richard's heir then languishing in London Tower. " Puer aspectit decoro et docili," writes 
90 THE CAPUCHIN ANNUAL 
Ware, " cetate etiam conveniente." On Whit unday in 1487 the great procession passed through packed streets and cheering crowds to Holy Trinity Cathedral (now Christ Church). There, the young pretender was raised aloft above the surging throng, upon the shoulders of a Wicklow giant " that every man might see him," and borne thus do,.vn the dim lit Gothic nave. In the presence of King Henry's deputy, the Chancellor, the Trea urer and many dignitaries of Church and tate as well as Yorkist refugees and their Burgundian troops, he was solemnly crowned" solemniter coronatus est." " The crown u eel," continues vVare, " was borrowed from a statue of the Virgin Mary, pre erved in a church dedicated to her name."- " Statua Beatce JVI arice V irginis in Ecclesia memorice dicata, prope portam urbis, qitam Dames Gate vulgo appellamus, asservata mutuatam ferunt," beside the Gate commonly called Dames Gate. The Church refen ed to was Santa Maria del Dam, situated inside the city walls and clo e to the Eastern Gate (at the com er of Palace Street). It was an Ostman church built when Lorean 6 Tuathail was Archbishop and Miles de Cogan drove the Ostman with red carnage from the Gate and decided Dublin's future as an Anglo-Norman tronghold. The church was named Del Dam from the old mill dam besid it- the property of Mary's Abbey unt il the thirteenth century when the King also had mills built there. The gate, one of the most strongly fortified of the city entrances, was named after the Church Dames Gate or Damask Gate. The statue referred to by Harris stood above that gate and might possibly have been the statue mentioned in the fifteenth century Waterford letter as " Our Lady of Damascus." But a Madonna figure placed 
above a city gate would almost certainly be carved of stone and the crown would be an integral part of the work, unless there was a separate iron crown. I know of no other references to the anta Maria Del Dam or the Dames Gate statues beyond those of Harris and Ware. But granted that there were two Madonnas, one in the Church of Santa Maria, the other in the niche above Dames Gate, both were very close to Holy Trinity Cathedral. Both were probably much earlier than the Mary's Abbey Madonna. Their crowns, too, would be earlier than the Mary's Abbey crown which Petric claimed to have seen in 1832 which he describes as a H nry VII crown:" Within the last few years," he writes, " the ancient silver crown with which the statue was adorned was taken from the Virgin's head, sold for its intrinsic value as old plate and melted down. The crown itself we have often seen exposed for sale in the window of the jeweller to whom it was sold. It was a double arch d crown such as appears on the coins of Henry VII and on his only; a circumstance which marks with exact preci ion the age of the statue which it had adorned." Petrie's observations and record of the type of crown are interesting, as the date he gives fits in so well with the iconography of the statue. His statement, however, is quite inconsistent with the tradition of the " hog-trough." The crown, if not filched at the time of the dissolution, would certainly have been removed when the statue received its coat of Reformation paint. The history of Simnel's coronation is interesting because it is associated with one of the Dublin Madonnas although we cannot say with certainty from which the crown was taken. These are some of the points in connection with the Dublin Madonna which still remain to be cleared up. * * * 
OUR LADY OF DUBLIN 91 
In carrymg out investigations with :reference to Dublin pre-Reformation statues, we can find no other survival of this period with the exception of that of the little retable tatuetteperhaps aint Kevin- which was found some years ago near the lake at Glendalough. It retains traces of the original painting and gilding and is now in the ational Museum beside the very interesting group of Galway figures, found in a hollow tree at Kilcorbin not far from the old Franciscan friary. Good luck or chance may bring to light further sculptured pieces. This year I happened on a little wooden Madonna in a hardware shop, in a small town in County Limerick. It has been treasured in the same family for generations. 
* * * As the sole surviving image from the wreckag of the Reformation the Dublin statue brings before us much of the city's history. From the artist's workshop of the sixteenth century to the great Abbey of Cistercian monks where it was venerated it witnessed the passing of viceroys 
and of Irish leaders, the fall of all it patrons, the destruction of the great ecclesiastical in titutions of the country. It sank, like the Irish people, into contempt and misery. But like the peQple it was restored to a place of dignity and becomes an active influence in the resurgent faith. The Tudors and Fitzgeralds passed. Rinucinni came and the Confederation of Kilkenny to which Mary's Abbey sent Dr. Patrick Plunkett, Abbot and uncle of Blessed Oliver. Cromwell and the Restoration came and went, and the Abbey, may very well have been visit d by Oliver Plunkett himself on his way from Rome to his Primatial See. Then follow successive dark periods of persecution and of generous sacrifice for freedom. In the broken remnant of Mary's Abbey Robert Emmet made a secret arsenal for the arms which were to break the Union and bring liberty to the people. With the influx of the poor Irish into the city, Dublin grew larger. And so it is that to-day we find the crowds of workers vindicating an undying cause of faith at a shrine which has suffered and prevailed with the people.
