THE dreariest West Briton is the Gaelic enthusiast who deserted the philosophy of Irish Ireland for the slavery of the English letter. He deserts the integral life which is the sphere of the spirit vivifying the flesh, as Patrick brought it to us transforming our island and its race. He turns aside to find his happiness in the tyranny of the letter enslaved by spiritual weariness. His great prophet is " AE." The lines On behalf of some Irishmen not followers of tradition are Russell's more enduring standard as against some notions of his not so poisonous. 
"We would no Irish sign efface, But yet our lips would gladlier hail The firstborn of the Coming Race Than the last splendour of the Gael. No blazoned banner we unfold One charge alone we give to youth : Against the sceptred myth to hold The golden heresy of truth.'' 
The irony of it is, these writer worship every antiquity, Irish, Indian, Infernal, so long as it is not the antiquity of the Church, while they are singing of the superman to come. Yeats shows a like aberration and you see the perverted twist hinted at in To the Rose upon the Rood of Time
" Come near, that no more blinded by man's fate, I find under the boughs of love and hate In all poor foolish things that live a day Eternal beauty wandering on her way." 
He " who sang to sweeten Ireland's 
wrong" had no honey but the echo of Keats: " Beauty is truth, truth beauty, that is all Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know." What a beldame is beauty for them ! Having seen, as they thought, with Sir Horace Plunkett the failure of faith without works, they tried the opposite heresy - works without faith. That is just what is wrong with art in the English-speaking post-Protestant world. The spawn of Protestantism has fouled the pools of the world with the croaking from the ugly mouths of all the -isms of evil. In splitting Christendom into fragments Luther seated the bad dichotomy of divorce, fornication and adultery in religion, science, art, life and the family. In fact literary criticism, to make our special point, is now reduced to a mere discussion of barren technique, divorced from content, as if you could have the spirals of the spider's web without the silken saliva, or without the spider. Would that we could see clearly in Ireland that what we and the world need is integral humanism, Christian humanism, where work, though it is a curse, will be blessed by art that has a meaning for joy or sorrow, love or hate, in integral life which has its only explanation through Faith. At least, Irishman, since the Gospel is true, what is the use of pretending ? " This is true life." The philosopher-artist must present us with the challenging message of the thirteenth century 
- the integral life- the synthesis that sums all, that seemingly without fuss, fret or effort presents us with Ireland's Holy Grail, the Ardagh Chalice ; or Dante's great song, or Angelico's peep into heaven, or Albert's or Thomas's presentation of virtue and knowledge as the life of God, which man drinks in happiness through suffering by grace unto glory. But the Irish still remain. In the last century but few expressed to the English-speaking world that saving tradition. Newman was a torch-bearer of God, and was the first modern stylist to invent Catholicism only to find it was there for nineteen hundred years. Alice Meynell (sister of Lady Butler) was such a torch-bearer and she was the literary coryphceus of Chesterton and Belloc. She was born in 1849 and lived to 1922. Chesterton was born in 1874 and Belloc in 1870. We might say Alice Meynell was as the rosy-fingered dawn that heralded, at least in England, the rebirth of Christian humanism, whose role Paul Claudel, the Frenchman, may be taken to describe, " to restore a Catholic imagination and sensibility which have been withered and parched for four centuries, thanks to the triumph of a purely lay literature whose ultimate corruption we are witnessing to-day." The dregs of an age in fact which we hope will be the end of an age, and it is strange the dregs and the end are found in Ireland in Joyce, while Canon Sheehan, word for word, drowns Joyce in "Catholic imagination and sensibility." Three years after Alice Meynell, Canon Sheehan was born in 1852 in Mallow. Alice Meynell's first work " Preludes " was published in 1875. Canon Sheehan's first article was published in The Irish Ecclesiastical Record in 1881. Its title was " Religious Instruction in Intermediate Schools." (Is it significant of our being in the old rut that I find on looking through the secondary teacher!?' 
annual for this year- The School and College Year Book- there is not one article about religion ?) Canon Sheehan's second article was on " Christian Art " and his enthusiasm for a picture by that Scot, Sir Noel Paton, who was hard in his religion and hard in his painting but pietistic, detailed and popular. The title of the picture is Satan watching the sleep of Christ. Was it a symbol of the description we have given of Christian humanism ? If Alice Meynell was like the dawn that greets the Catholic world awaking from sleep, Canon Sheehan was like the morning star of the expanding symphony of the orchestra of day. But for us in Ireland he shone alone in a dark hour before 
" - the morning stars sang together And all the sons of God shouted for joy." 
As Father Matthew Russell said of him : he was the first literary priest since Prout's time. But Prout was only a jester bitterly gibing at O'Connell, that great if imperfect figure. While echoing gladly Daniel Corkery in these last words, great is my wonder that he does not condescend even to mention Canon Sheehan in his hard but just words about " this submerged world of Anglo-Irish literature." It must be because Canon Sheehan is unique, in a class by himself. Knocknagow he notices. " It is a book unknown except to the Irish ; and again one is not sorry, for, when all is said, it is only good in parts, and not great anywhere. The emotional content here also is right ; the mental equipment however, that shaped it out was not hardened by culture and discipline." Canon Sheehan is known to America and Europe. His work has wrought conversions to the Faith. The Holy Father, his biographer Father Heuser tells us, made familiar with " Paddy Dan " in an Italian translation 
sent him the title of Doctor of Divinity. The American humourist, Joel Chandler Harris, author of Uncle Remus, chose for constant companions during his retirement, the Bible and Thomas a Kempis, then Shakespeare, Newman, Sheehan. At this time he had not yet become a Catholic. For him My New Curate was a piece of real literature and the finest book he had read for many a day. So he avowed. Then Sheehan's novels have been translated into German (eight of them), French (three), Dutch, Italian, Spanish, Hungarian, Slavonic as well as into Irish. Besides, " emotional content and mental equipment hardened by culture and discipline" shaped out Sheehan's writing. Well, what about perfection of form ? Did he achieve it ? Aye, there's the rub. Further on we shall tackle that question. Still further wonder possesses me for the neglect of Sheehan when we measure his writings against Professor Corkery's mental rule. " The three great forces which working for long in the Irish national being, have made it so different from the English national being, are : (1) The Religious Consciousness of the People; (2) Irish Nationalism ; and (3) The Land. Now the mentality of that crowd of 30,000 I looked upon in Thurles (at the hurling match) was chiefly the result of the interplay of these three forces." Behold Sheehan's expressive writings fit in there as the hand in the glove ! It's only a detail, but even he gives us an interesting description of the old style hurling match in Glenanaar. All his works are preoccupied with religion. There is no need to stress that point. Irish Nationalism and especially the Fenian tradition have been fully expounded in story and character and essay as it never was till his time. The Fenian Mother expresses all his pride in that 
physical force movement which he was afraid was dead. 
" Ah, 'tis you're the full of the door, mo bhuachaill, 'Tis you're the full of the door ! But big as you are and broad as you are, Mo bhuachaillin bán astór, Now the moon is up o'er the valley And the whistle is hushed in the glen, 'Tis time to go, mo bhuachaillin bán And die with your Fenian men." 
The land fully occupies him especially from the point of view of the personal solution through the character of Maxwell in Lisheen. It would be difficult to find a finer expression in Irish or Anglo-Irish of the forces of the national being than we get in Sheehan's novels. We need not fear this confession will confound us who believe that Irish literature can mean only Gaelic literature. We have but to adjust ourselves. Our Irish stylists have translated four of Sheehan's novels for the youth of to-day. All his works will be translated into Irish and so will live for Ireland when Joyce and Yeats will be names in a history of literature. See how that famous passage at the end of Glenanaar retains the eloquence of the original. " Come back, come back to the land of your fathers .... Let us hear the sound of the Gaelic in your halls.'' 
Fáilte abhaile rómhaibh ! fiorchaoin fáilte rómhaibh ! mile fáilte rómhaibh ar fhód agus ar fhearann bhúr sinnsear ! Cad ba bhreághtha linn-ne, ar fuaid na hallai aguinn ná teanga bhinn mhilis na Gaedhilge a bheith dá clos aris ? Ba gheal linn gáire bhur gcloinne, agus ceól caoin na pibe agus na cláirsighe a chlos amhlaidh a bhiodh i n-allód. B' aoibhinn linn gáir na bhfear groidhe sa léana thios cois na habhann, agus na seanamhráin ins na páirceanna, ba dhraoidheacht dúinn a chlos. Triallaidh oruinn ! Brostuighidh ! Níor eirigh grian ghlórmhar orruinn i nEirinn ó thréigeabhar sinn. Is dorcha gearr an lá againn agus is fada gruamdha i an oidhche. Féach anso thíos cois na habhann ar an sean-mhainistir, agus solus na gealaighe uirthi, mar a bhfuil ceo is cnámha bhúr sinsear sinte. Nil cúirt ná caisleán ná tugaid a gcuaird cráidhte orra i naghaidh na hoidhche fós, agus is minic uaill a mbansidhe le clos i gcuim oidhche ar mhaigh agus ar chnoc. Ni socair suan dóibh go mbion bhúr scáil ar a dtuama agus go gcorruighidh bhur núrnuithe eighneán an fhothaigh, amhlaidh is a chorruightear é le leoithne bhog na hoidhche ! " They dare not tell us that Sheehan was just a mere priest, and knew nothing about style or technique. At any rate he was conscious of aiming at such culture and discipline. He says : " True culture is the raising of previously educated intellectual faculties to their highest potency by the conscious effort of their possessors. Therefore it presupposes learning ; and it means in a certain sense moral as well as intellectual training. Thus when the character is formed each mental force, whether it belongs to the contemplative or the active order, each self, so cultivated will possess the privilege, insisted on by the poet , of being able to ' live resolvedly in the whole, the good, the beautiful '- not in 
the warped, the falsified, the egotistical ; not in the petty, the adulterated, the partial ; not in the school, the clique, the coterie ; but in the large sphere of universal and enduring ideas." Sheehan wrought every detail of that exacting demand in his own person, which is not irrelevant to our theme, and in his works. He is the voice crying in the wilderness: " Let us return to integral humanism. " He insists too that in the great pages of Catholic authors truth has been presented in a form not more secure by its consistency and fidelity than attractive by its eloquence. He will not admit that distinct charm is the exclusive privilege of heresy, and to prove it he appeals to Bossuet , Fenelon, Lacordaire, Gatry, Montalembert, Ozanam, Marie de Biron in France, Balmez in pain, Brown on in America, Newman in England, who have clothed truth with elegance and style. These and such like were his masters and he could not but imbibe the gift from them because he read them all and hundreds beside. You will not find these names in the works of laudation of the " golden heresy of truth." They are too ignorant and run to pagan pools too eagerly. Sheehan's name comes not amiss amongst the names renowned for eloquence, elegance and style. Even if the nicely fastidious strike out the last two qualities it may still be maintained that Sheehan's writing was full of eloquence. The fact may be admitted that Canon Sheehan, desiring to strike down eloquent heresy with a modern weapon, desired to be Catholic above all. And when I say Catholic I mean Catholic from the ground to the sky and beyond. Even if he is only Catholic all these other things are added unto him. It is true he was formed in character and outlook when as a priest he began to write. He was not a professional writer. Yet he had the creative urge. But his purpose was serious. He 
believed he had a message to deliver. He reached the great audience of the world because he was a Catholic and even though his work was unequal. Perhaps his friends praised him too much in life. He is not altogether neglected now, but he deserves to be studied and imitated still. We shall all be glad if our young men surpass him so long as they do not lose his integrity. In Studies of 1917, four years after his death, John D. Colclough thinking he had taught Canon Sheehan ('twas his brother Denis he had taught at Gayfield -(the " Mayfield " of Geoffrey Austin) wrote that Sheehan was much overrated as a novelist. He was merely a man of talent and not a genius. Moreover he viewed the national character and life from the standpoint of the pulpit or the confessional. He asserted that Sheehan therefore failed to pass the test for lasting literature in universality of human interest and humour. He sums up confidently : " The next generation may know the titles of Canon Sheehan's novels ; they will not know their contents." And Colclough sighs and regrets Sheehan did not make himself another Faber eschewing fiction altogether. In the same periodical at a later date Father George O'Neill, in bringing to the notice of his readers the Canon's last reminiscences, The Moonlight of Memory, says Sheehan could not be trusted in the minor matters of the literary craft and mentions as illustration, without examples, merely punctuation. He too summed up Sheehan's works in a broad generalisation. " The mind of their author was one that encompassed much but grasped little." Readers of Sheehan admitted to me they had to skip pages of his novels because they were altogether above their heads. Father Matthew Russell's lady critic too would not review The Triumph of Failure, saying: " It was too high for me." A priest, and 
a Canon at that , and " First of First " in his diocese exclaimed to me once : " Sheehan ? Pshaw ! He never wrote anything worth while except one poem - Sentan the Culdee." That was the poem that occupied ten pages of The Irish Monthly, a periodical which helped so many writers, including Yeats, to fame. (In a letter of Sheehan's to Father Russell he sends five shillings to a fund to publish Yeats's Wanderings of Oisin.) Well, we have to be thankful for small mercies from the mighty critics who with all their learning and acumen never put pen to paper. Sheehan himself exclaimed : " What a mighty literature we should have if ten per cent. of the critics wrote for us ! " Then Professor Stockley in two characteristic papers, splendidly deals with the literary misdemeanours of Canon Sheehan and his handful of real blunders. My readers should study these, one to be found in Essays in Irish Biography, the other in The School and College Year Book 1941-'42. One must realise that the strictures depend to an extent on the Professor's old-world exacting taste which fights shy (I am informed, I hope correctly) even of admitting Francis Thompson, because of word heterodoxy, to the literary valhalla. But his is the plaint of an admirer who knows his author inside out and loves him, who is pained by the slipshod trifle as the young man is pained by the unconscious blunder of his father in public Let me pass on to the points of my thesis. Sheehan was a great writer, greater than a novelist, by using the medium of the story to preach truth and make Irishmen free with the freedom wherewith Christ has made them free. He had the gift of vision ; we shall not call it prophecy. He had the gift of versatility, trying many media, using words of many languages including the Gaelic with a multitude of ideas that  
made him a good European. He had the gift of communicating the good odour of his personality and courage. He had the gift of charity like Chesterton and guarded every word for fear of giving offence. He never willingly wounded, losing nothing thereby. As a reformer he was not blind to the Irish vices and defects. He had the gift of eloquence which insinuated his message into the heart and mind and spirit of the reader. Emphatically he gave us pages of humour, and even mordant wit, wholesomer than we can find anywhere else in Irish authors. And he is decidedly unsurpassed in modern times in Ireland for his vast store of worthwhile literary erudition. This is especially true of his use of the Bible, the Fathers of the Church, and the classics. Then we'll admit his writing was only one of his recreations. And the secret? " I have a child's wonder and a child's love." Verily this man has made the Bible, God's own book, live for us again against the blasphemous use made of it by Joyce even while Sheehan wrote. And we don't go to the Bible for style, though we might for stories and sweeping statements like "The whole world is placed in evil." It will remain to consider Sheehan as essayist and poet. 
The priest - novelist 
We had better dispose first of the prejudice against the priest, though a priest-novelist should be novel enough to get a hearing. The literary world of Protestant and post-Protestant allegiance does not want the priest anywhere, and it is hoarse from shouting : Keep the priest out of politics ! We all know the meaning of that. As a matter of teaching and discipline the Pope tells the priest to keep out of party politics, but he tells him to fight the good fight in his essential duties. One of the least perhaps of these 
essential duties is the wielding of the pen like a two-edged sword. The Pope approved of Sheehan, so " Daddy Dan " has the best imprimatur he could get in this world. It is futile then for Colclough to tell us, while he gives away his case : " Sheehan's fictions spread large upon the canvas no life-like figures, no new and original creations, except perhaps that of the model priest of the nineteenth century- a type of man least of all others adapted to treatment in fiction, owing to the very nature of his sacred character and office ; and furthermore an unnecessary type for portraiture upon the written page. Unnecessary : the good priest of to-day, as of yesterday, is a type of genuine manhood that all men see and most men revere, if they view him and his work with unprejudiced eyes. There is no cabalistic secrecy about him. Not of the world, he is yet in the world ; and the world needed no My New Curate and no Blindness of Dr. Gray for enlightenment as to his excellences and his limitations. The truth is, Canon Sheehan . . . could never discard his sacerdotal spectacles for the plain vision of a man of the world. He was not so much an author writing for ordinary folk, as a priest preaching, always gently and often beautifully, on the foibles of ordinary folk. Hence his tales are largely dogmatic, sermonic, prosy, prolix." The fact is Sheehan like every priest is savagely attacked by his own, but he must be ready to suffer that more than the layman. Did not Father Hogan in criticising criticisms in Luke Delmege use the phrase " stilted nonsense " ? · But in reaching the priest he reaches ten men at once and the multiplying ripples of influence are multiplied a hundredfold. If Sheehan created priest-characters in their excellences and limitations and if he created them well and beautifully the reverse of Colclough's picture must be true. 
Let us blow a breath of more fragrant air through these criticisms of the priest as writer. We had better how he has every right to preach in his novels, from the admission of the modern writer. Shaw maintained, in taking Ibsen a his master instead of Shakespeare, that Ibsen was not artistic but moral, that his dramas were didactic, that all great art was didactic, that Ibsen was strongly on the side of some of his characters and strongly against others, that there was preaching and public spirit in the work of good dramatists ; and if this were not so, dramatists and all other artists would be mere pander of intellectual debauchery, to be locked up a the Puritans locked up the stage players. And Sheehan has said his say about this too. " But art for its own sake ! Art as teacher, because of its own intrinsic perfection ; and because perfection of any kind is morality ! This is a great and subtle heresy." Away with "art for art's sake," and let us restore integral humanism. The humbug has lasted too long. Every one else can preach his own nostrum, but the priest about priests or his work in the world must be dumb in the realm of fiction because it is not art ! Chesterton has pointed out that even the atheist definitely believes in disbelief and avows and propagates his faith unfaithful and calls it art. When the world has been sickened for four hundred years with the preaching of falsehood it should be a relief for dreary pagans to read the sincere artistry of a Sheehan in his integrated and related humanism. Canon Barry another priest-novelist finally refutes Colclough when he writes to Canon Sheehan : " I wish the modern reader would bear to be told more about a priest's life." An analysis of his plots shows that they are not complicated by intricate external adventure, yet they have plenty of  
action and wide scope in human interest. Sheehan may be called the novelist of the Irish Catholic mind. His works are mainly psychological and most of them are preoccupied with the problem of conversion. Sheehan's glory is that he gave us a new type of story in English. One might not go too far in saying he created the clerical novel in the English language. Clerical is a word enough to make even some Irishmen froth at the mouth and to make even the Catholic nowadays nervous because he half believe the clergy have undue influence. Most men would not worry about the word as applied to John Inglesant or Barchester Towers. But these are very small beer beside the sparkling champagne of Sheehan. The kind of spirit we mean is best illustrated by Sheehan, in wondering why Robespierre, decreeing the existence of the Supreme Being, was not killed with ridicule. " And why," he continues, " his modern imitator, Viviani, who, in our days, has, 'by one magnificent gesture swept the Supreme Being out of existence,' is not annihilated under a storm of sarcastic pleasantry is also unintelligible. Is France doomed ? Has she lost her sense of ridicule- or that fine perception of her own absurdities, which alas ! does not always accompany the dangerous talent of seeing and noting the sad betise to which other individuals and  
natures are subject ? " The handful of writers who sadden us sometimes could take that to heart as sound advice and take to laughing out of existence the puny pantheists who name-call Christ's truth ; and not , at the same time, destroy the sanctities and invite the doom of decadence. The stories of Sheehan stand for these sanctities, this tradition, and their weaknesses endear him to us while they call to us to outdo him in finer plot and more powerful word. Sheehan is greater than all our novelists because he has dared to give us priests and people with the dash of idealism and realism that strikes a balance. No one else has dared to give us this wholesome whole that is Ireland. Perhaps no one else could. He has the impishness of good humour in all his priest-characters ; in the humility and sagacity of " Daddy Dan " ; in the simplicity and perplexity of Luke Delmege ; in the Sinaitic tragedy of Dr. Gray; in the shoneenism and bonhomie of Canon Murray; in the social justice and industry of Letheby and Cosgrove ; in the mysterious failure of Kevin O'Donnell in the mysterious labyrinths of Maynooth and the saving of the spoiled priest by the chance encounter with the boy that adored him ; in the marvellous prophetic pathetic competence of Br. Felix, the Monk of Trabolgan ; in the harsh power, eloquence and crusading spirit of Father Aidan. Of his lay characters and their portrayal we can claim that the charming old German Professor Messing, the philosophising Geoffrey Austin, the foreshadowed legionary Charlie Travers, the Fenians, James Halpin and Myles Cogan, the Yank, Terence Casey and the innumerable minor characters that flit through his pages will live beside his priests in the gallery of Irish fiction. Through all, there runs the melancholy of the Gael. But in regard to that we may borrow some phrases of Chesterton regarding Shakes
speare. Sheehan was not in any sense a pessimist, he was if anything an optimist so universal as to be able to enjoy even pessimism. That all is vanity, that life is dust , and love is ashes, these are frivolities, these are jokes, that a Catholic can afford to utter. And in fact Sheehan is constantly pointing out the real mad melancholy of the moderns. This startling truth seems to be best illustrated by contrasting The Triumph of Failure with The Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. Joyce well illustrates all Sheehan's warnings about the semi-paganism and religious indifference of Irish education, and it took some time for our system to provide substantially for Christian instruction in our secondary schools, and it is a question whether we have yet equipped our army of youth with the full armour. Both of these literary efforts give a picture of Dublin. Sheehan's work has an objective, not an autobiographical, purpose. It is the other way round with the Portrait. Stephen Dedalus is Joyce the boy and young man with " a sensitive nature smarting under the lashes of an undivined and squalid way of life." Squalid is a good word for the products of that Dublin school. It is squalor, spiritual squalor, unmodified except by the much more loathsome and ungrateful crime of blasphemy. The golden heresy loses all the gilt as the squalid way of life unfolds beneath the way of a Catholic presented to the youth, but spurned. He failed to integrate art and science and common sense, which is literally Catholic sense, with his faith. Knowing he is in the wrong and deliberately and wilfully persevering in the wrong, he exclaims he will use for his defence, " silence, exile, cunning." The passage must be quoted. " I will tell you what I will do, and what I will not do. I will not serve that in which I no longer believe, whether it call itself my home, my fatherland or my 
church, and I will try to express myself in some mode of life or act as freely as I can, using for my defence the only arms I allow myself to use, silence, exile and cunning." " You're a born sneerer, Stephie," says to him, Davin the Irish nationalist. And again Dedalus continues : " You talk to me of nationality, language, religion. I shall try to fly by those net ." But as the Jew, Louis Golding, remarks, he didn't escape them because he is always harking back to the Bible and the doctors of the Church. He is a prophet if you like, a sinister prophet, for we know the sequel - scandalising not only the faithful but the world- not only prostituting the truth, and human nature even, but also the undoubted mastery of the word in power that he had. He tore intelligible language to shreds with the phantasmagoria of the subconscious, a that underworld of the dream imagination is called. And then the further neo-pagan sequel that he decreed, spurning the body as if he could annihilate it, the scattering of his ashes over a Parisian hill ! They stand for the rights of the flesh and then stamp upon it to no wise purpose. " Silence, exile and cunning" indeed ! But to what final purpose? To quote a line from Sheehan: 
" A whimpering trembled through the halls of Hell. Ay de mi ! Who can tell ? " 
Sheehan's hero summed the matter up for him elf when he too was floundering in the Serbonian bog. " Perhaps if my mode of thought had been that which commended itself to St. Anselm and others, and is represented by the expression Fides quaerens intellectum (Faith seeking understanding) ; or to put it more plainly, if I, safely anchored in the quiet havens of the Church, had allowed intellect and imagination to roam freely over the trackless 
expanses of human thought, perhaps I would have sustained no real loss. But with faith theoretically unimpaired, I reversed the dictum, and wrote Intellectus quaerens fidem (Understanding seeking faith) ; and out on the high seas, with winds moaning around me, and indistinct voices calling to me through the darkness, my soul went wailing for light and peace, repulsed at every side where it hoped to find rest, and mocked by the echoes of it own querulous pain. Perhaps there is some pleasure in such pain ; but assuredly the chiefest woes that follow and encompass wayward humanity are caused by the self-constituted Light-bearers of the world, who flash the little lanterns of their wisdom before the eyes of a dazed multitude, and command them to follow into the quagmires and morasses of doubt and unbelief." How we could have admired Joyce's pen pictures of Dublin, " the fabric of the city lay prone in haze," the lectures in the Belvedere retreat, the analysis of Aquinas ' definition of beauty integritas, consonantia, claritas, " wholeness, harmony and radiance," were not the whole work dust and ashes on the tongue for want of spirit, could Joyce but accept that integritas which excludes only sin. Even a good job of work done with words which signify nothing worth while is void for literature and life. The worship of intellect and the flesh in the tyranny of style without integral humanism produces nothing but heralds of revolt. And surely Joyce rode out the revolt till his medium burst in the midst like the frog who would be the cow in the fable. But the imp in the Irishman will add : the devil's cure to the king's English. Joyce in one sense has a message of joy for resurgent Gaelic. English is worn out, try your own so untried medium, and don't be bothering us with your meretricious art. The distinction between the philosophy 
of Joyce and Sheehan is a sign for coming generations, for we too look to the coming race, under the eye of God. The difference between Sheehan and Joyce is the whole hierarchical world of difference between reverence and blasphemy, between the priest and the pervert, between the Saviour and His adversary. This is not merely the judgment of the orthodox though it is the message of all Sheehan's works. Shaw, even Shaw says : " I could not write the words Mr. Joyce uses : my prudish hand would refuse to form the letters ; and I can find no interest in his infantile clinical incontinencies, or in the flatulations which he thinks worth mentioning." Shaw threw his copy of Ulysses into the fire ! Even (I can't get a better word though I need it except I put it in italics) even D. H. Lawrence exclaims : " Old fags and cabbage-stumps of quotations from the Bible . . and the rest stewed in the juice of deliberate journalistic dirty-mindedness ... James Joyce bores me stiff ! " And still we wince and are shamefaced at Sheehan's sweeping magnificent fulminations. The sure touch of the priest-philosopher coming down to the story medium is contrasted with the wasted genius of the literary craftsman. Sheehan's spirit could cry out : " I told you so." Geoffrey Austin meditates : " It is not difficult for me now to perceive where the radical defect in my education lay. All moral feelings- self-discipline, self-reverence, self-conquest- were an unknown factor in my training." And it is not that Sheehan refrains from denouncing us without measure. The Frenchman in Geoffrey Austin says : " We in France are one thing or another. We are infidels or Catholics. But you Irish are such abject slaves, that you . cling to your faith, because it will save your miserable souls ; but you are afraid to practise the c1uties of that faith because it might interfere with your miserable bodies . .. I have only to add 
that, as a proof of what I say, you have never produced but one great Catholic layman, and- you broke his heart." The manliness of the gentle Sheehan breaks as a dash of salt spray through his story as the manliness of St. Patrick in his Confessio breaks through his barbaric Latin. With Sheehan the message is more than the story or the language; with Joyce, the artist is ready to break everything if he can freely express himself. Sheehan is answered in Ireland by the life of many a Charlie Travers- we might say a legion- while Joyce is just a barren name in a catalogue of stylists. What is the use of style if we have nothing to put it on- just another suit of clothes without a man inside. Father Heuser could exclaim : " To my amazement, I learnt that Geoffrey Austin had but a limited sale." Father Heuser, the American who discovered the Irishman, must get his tremendous praise for what happened afterwards. Of My New Curate, without reckoning translations, thirty thousand copies were sold within eighteen months. Duke Delmege was issued in an edition of ten thousand copies. Ask our booksellers in Ireland and they will tell you that Canon Sheehan's novels are always in demand.[note: Messrs. Longmans, Green & Co. have kindly given me particulars of sales of Sheehan's books on this side of the Atlantic; they are unable to give me details of printing and sales in America or of those by the Talbot Press :- Blindness of Dr. Gray, 18,400 ; Essays, 2,500 ; Glenanaar, 11,700 ; Graves of Kilinorna, 13,000 ; The Intellectuals (imported from New York), 1, 600 ; Lisheen, 11,600 ; Lost Angel of a Ruined Paradise, 3,500 ; Luke Delmege, 12,000; Miriam Lucas, 11,300 ; My New Curate (stock received since 1928), 2,800; Parerga (imported from New York), 1,800 ; The Queen's Fillet, 11,500 ; Tristram Lloyd (stock received since 1929), 900. Total, 102,800. My friend Seamus Ó Suileabhain, of the Government Publication Office, supplied me with the following statistics of the Irish translations of Canon Sheehan. Gleann an Air, 2,099 copies ; Lisin, 150 copies; Filéad na Bannrioghna, 110 copies ; An Sagart Og, 1175 copies. These figures must be multiplied at least by five to count the little flock of readers in Irish who give us the only hope we have for the future. Glenanaar is in its second edition. Lisheen and The Queen's Fillet were only recently published. 

A North Monastery boy of fourteen told me the other day he had read all Canon Sheehan's novels. German university students wrote these on various aspects of Canon Sheehan's writings including his humour. Our students in the National University, and in some of our ecclesiastical colleges are still presenting their theses on Canon Sheehan for the M.A. degree. Sheehan showed to his patron the joy and pain of the success. " Now I am on the full swing of the tide, and my last book has made me a thousand friends. But it was weary work, only I felt that I was working for Our Lord and He would reward me. And He has a thousandfold. But venturing into the field of Catholic literature is a greater risk than many are aware of and many a writer can say as Dr. Barry says, aquae inundaverunt animam meam (the waters have flooded my soul)." We gladly make the admission of the purpose of the priest, so damaging in the eyes of the fin-de-siecle world, when he took to writing those " chapters on clerical life in Ireland." " They were intended for popular reading ; and my thought was to introduce my own ideas, suggestions, etc., under the sugar coating of a story. I would hardly care to write these papers, if I could not make them edifying as well as amusing . . . I hope I shall succeed in not making my teaching too obtrusive . . . My great difficulty is to draw from life, and yet avoid identifying any character with living persons. And we are so narrow and insular here in Ireland that it is almost impossible to prevent priests saying : ' That is so and so. That is Father --,' etc. But I shall steer clear without wounding charity. I see the necessity of being very accurate and circumspect in what I publish." Every novelist is faced with these problems and Sheehan deals with them again in his essays, especially in An 
Unpublished Preface and Catholic Literary Criticism. But not every novelist is equipped as Sheehan was and few have been so sublimely purposeful for good. We stand for God and for His glory. That was the torch he bore and you can take it or leave it. His strength lay undoubtedly in the portrayal of pastoral or clerical characters and doings, and no man can cover all the ground, but even there Sheehan can bear rigid comparison with the best. 
His Vision
He would not be a Christian humanist if he did not cast light on man while showing him the light of God. A priest turned novelist in order to be the better mediator between God and man might repel many. Yet what Canon Barry, another priest-novelist , wrote to him gives us the reason why Sheehan should not repel. He had the human touch. Barry writes : " There are words on some of its pages (The Triumph of Failure) that come home to me, and express certain intimate feelings vividly as I know them ; and what more could the supreme poet achieve ? I mean poet in the most serious sense- vales, the prophet that teaches in music." Sheehan was then the interpreter of God and the priest to the priest . And the priest the man of mystery like His Master, in direct ratio with his union with Him, is also of intense interest to the layman, apart from the fact that the layman is the father and brother of priests and the spiritual son too. His audience then is as wide as the world, and he creates his world in every mind that reads. Sheehan's world was the whole realm of eternity, and it is no wonder that his characters reach out to it and that he has given us prophecies of time to come, since time is the moving image of eternity. It is in the realm of 
the two ideas that interest men most , religion and nationality, that Sheehan shows himself possessed of vision that sees a glorious future and predicts its coming. "And oh ! " exclaims Charlie Travers, " if ever the day should come that I, lifting up my voice, could wean my young fellow-countrymen from their West-British ambitions and desires, their Civil Services, and smug governmental sinecures and concentrate all their energies in building up a great Catholic nation - Irish in its traditions, Irish in its sympathies, ay, even narrow and insular so far that a wall of brass would be builded around the island to keep out British ideas and principles, and those .fin-de-siècle ideas that are steadily undermining religion amongst us- then I think, I could sing my Nunc dimittis with resignation, ay, even with pleasure. And if, O Good God ! the day should ever dawn that the old monastic spirit would creep back into the land, and the now barren valleys of Ireland would blossom with cloister and choir, and the now silent skies would echo with the lost and forgotten art of praising God through the Church's offices ; and if once more the children of the church throughout the world would send their sons to us as to the central sanctuary of faith and knowledge-would not this be the realisation of all that the human heart could expect, and would not life be pleasantly sacrificed, if consumed in such a glorious enterprise ? " The vision is slowly unfolding along those lines, as they know who compare the Ireland of his day with this. No more need be quoted now to show Sheehan's disgust with the generation that Pearse said was the worst in Irish history. Sheehan himself anticipated Pearse by saying : " There was never a generation of Irishmen so sorely tried. It is the worst and darkest period of the nation's occultation." And even the 
gloom of The Graves of Kilmorna is relieved by the message : '' Be of good cheer ; there is an angel watching over Ireland . . . from time to time the blood of the martyr-patriot calls to heaven." 
His versatility
Assuredly Sheehan is not narrow with all his talk of the wall of brass. Idea jostles with idea and opinion is challenged by opinion to the verge of contradiction in his pages. A good case could be made that he was inspired by English culture with his English accent and the undoubted understanding that he had of the English character and the real love that he had for English literature. Study of Carlyle in Maynooth set him off on his excursions into a wide course of reading. The English Who's Who of 1912 considered Canon Sheehan " one of the best read men of the day." Still he knew more about European literature than most cultured Irishmen and he read German, French and Italian. These were such easy accomplishments for him that he seems to presume all his readers are learned and so he did make a display of words and phrases from French, German, Italian, Latin. And it didn't matter to him whether their authors were pagan or Protestant ; he transmuted all in the alembic of his Catholic mind. He gave Ireland a glance at European literature in miniature. Some words he threw down gave his readers a liberal education. Kampaner Thal in My New 
Curate eluded Americans and afterwards French readers. He had to explain it was The Meadow Valley, a treatise by his favourite German writer, Jean Paul Richter, on the immortality of the soul. He must call his poems, Cithara mea, recalling the psalms. His quotation from these modern languages would fill a small volume, and it could be prefaced with his dictum : ' We dare not use the poor pauper-relative word in English. It would shrink aside and be ashamed. By a natural instinct we use the kingliest word." He was not always correct in his use of Irish words though he did use them even where you wouldn't expect them, as when he spoke of the banker's wife and her friends having a seanchus. Regarding Glenanaar which was his only strictly Irish title, he writes : " I spelled the name of the romance phonetically. But perhaps I would spare myself some criticism from the Gaelic League if the word were printed correctly Glenandir." But it should be " gleann " to be correct. However, he was a good Gaelic Leaguer, he had his own phonetic spelling ! Everywhere in his writing while you can feel his wonderful command of English, he is discontented with it, and like an Irishman he roams the world and ransacks old languages and modern, to give us a many-sided view of the world. Being a self-made litterateur in the days when Ireland had not a university that she could call her own, he did not as he might, become narrow because of that lack. His own study broadened his mind, just because he had the training in universal ideas that is the gift of priestly education, and in the process he broadened the mind of Ireland. There are depths in My New Citrate, The Triumph of Failure, Luke Delmege and The Graves of Kilmorna that are still unsounded when you read them three or four times. At the same time this breadth of view and versatility attracted the two continents to look at Ireland again and in a more penetrating fashion than had been known since Daniel O'Connell's time. While Sheehan was attracted most of all to Germany, perhaps because of his noviceship under Carlyle and the fashion of the time, when the English boasted of their Teutonic relations, his Catholic instinct here again made him sound a note of forewarning in the midst of his enthusiasm for German idealism. " Germany," he notes, " is a huge barrack where every adult must pass through the ordeal of a severe and rigid discipline to form part eventually of a colossal and irresistible force that may crush the French on the one hand, and the Slav on the other." The experts of our days would have been glad to have as sure a touch as that sentence reveals. His mind faced every way in the realm of universal ideas, and, having the optimism of the Catholic he scattered his erudition and his creative ideas abroad on the soil of Ireland and they have borne fruit a hundredfold and will never cease to bear fruit. His torch is the torch of God that lights fires of enthusiasm for religion, nationality and letters. Speaking of Glenanaar and Miriam Lucas, he wrote : " One is purely narrative without any particular motive underlying the tale, the other deals with some complex questions about labour, etc. This latter would be the completion of the trilogy for which My New Curate and Duke Delmege are the first parts. It is an idea of forecasting a perfect civilisation founded purely on religious lines. You will notice the refrain running through Luke Delmege : we must create our own civilisation. I am anxious to formalise such a civilisation founded on simplicity, and self-surrender ; and as alien as possible to all our modern ideas of progress. You will perceive that Luke's failure sprang from his want of touch with this supernatural element." 
The mind of Sheehan encompassed much but grasped little, says the critic of the household of the faith ; but Holmes, the American judge, while declaring " I don't believe your philosophy or the religion which you so beautifully exalt," yet confesses " I must tell you once more of the love and exaltation that your words have the skill to command as few word that I have read anywhere can. " 
The novel in his heart
It may be urged against him that his work are all autobiography. But as he said himself literature is the general confession of mankind. What writer does not express himself, and is not conditioned by hi own personality, knowledge and belief or lack of belief ? It has been a favourite theory for a long time that Shakespeare the man himself never spoke through his characters, that it is impossible to discover the kind of man he was. The truth of course is that Shakespeare shows he was a Catholic by many a defined touch in a world that was perverting to heresy. It first dawned on me when I read Henry VIII and saw Anne Boleyn pinioned for ever on the point of a word of an old courtier countess. Sheehan though he placed Shakespeare as poet beside Dante and Richter, was in the false tradition and could not take much delight in Shakespeare. Shakespeare is thrown at us as the great objective writer, while I urge his greatness and balance, in spite of his coarseness and his faults, is due to his Catholicism. Sheehan's catalogue of Shakespeare's puppet how humanity is a funny paragraph in Parerga- " kings and queens, fools and mountebanks, courtiers and knights, tavern-brawlers and heroes, bishops and friars, nuncios and cardinals, warriors and boasters, dainty ladies and disreputable 
drabs, Greeks and Romans, Christians and infidels and Jews, English and French, Danes and Normans, Welsh and Irish and Scotch, ghosts and sprites, monsters and angels, hideous witches and dainty Ariels and Queen Mabs, murderers, suicides, violence, craft ... Shakespeare's masque of humanity is perfect." Sheehan's catalogue shows a like richness but more modern. Priests in all their charming variety, friars, nuns, informers, Fenians and patriots of much variety, Germans, French, English, Irish, Scots, parsons and their wives, landlords and tenants, capitalists and labourers, invalids, servant boys and girls, heroes and villains, Unionists and Nationalists, doctors and poets and artists and journalists, saints of social justice and saints hidden away, women of all classes but no drabs ; lepers, revolutionists, soldiers, socialists, children and amateur astronomers. A masque of Christian humanity, 'tis true, but not perfect. Sheehan felt his greatest want to be some intercourse with minds whose ideas would act as a stimulant to thought by casting new light on old subjects. He was thrown in on himself, and he could not go to the local pub or listen at keyholes. But what a self he was thrown in upon and how multitudinously he has expressed it ! His great heart was full of  
feeling even to tears. He has bared that heart in prose and poetry and all feel the better for looking into it. The world he pictured was full of tragedy, but it was also full of consolation. He drew most horrible pictures, as of the leper of the Pacific drowning himself with that plunge into the deep-a cameo in Geoffrey Austin. Beside it we can place the picture of Leviston and Fred Oliver of the Triumph of Failure, the farewell sermon of Dr. Gray, or the death of Father Hugo in Miriam Lucas, or the outrages of Major Outram. But in the midst of tragedy he held his hand, he idealised ; over all there was that unseen world that revealed itself to Luke Delmege. " He often listened at his bedroom window to his pastor, moving leisurely about the little garden beneath, and humming alternately with the psalms of his office, that loveliest of all Irish songs, that always reminds one of the wind wailing over the misty wet mountains-Savourneen Dheelish Eileen Oge. But it sounded very sweet and sad and lonely-there in that lonely place, with nothing to break the silences but the querulous cries of fowls, or the swift exultant chant of a bird, or the wind, that always, even in summer, wailed like a ghost seeking rest. But gradually Luke felt himself in a kind of sanctuary, the very atmosphere of which was prayer. The old Priest moving about the room, the old housekeeper in her kitchen, Ellie in the yard- all seemed to be holding an eternal unbroken communing with the Unseen. So too with the people. The old women, bending beneath the brosna of twigs and branches for the scanty fire, the young mothers rocking their children's cradles, the old men bent over the ashes in the open hearth, the young men in the fields-all, all appeared to think and live in prayer, 
which was only suspended to attend reluctantly to the meaner business of life. And if the old priest broke through the psalter, in a moment of regretful unconsciousness, to murmur Savourneen Dheelish, the young mother would sometimes break in upon her lullaby, Cusheen Loo, to whisper a prayer to the ever-present Mother and Divine Babe for her own sleeping child. And the sweet salutations: ' God save you ! ' ; ' God save you kindly agra !' spoken in the honeyed Gaelic- all bewildered Luke. The visible and tangible were in close communion with the unseen but not less real world behind the veils of time and space." Is it not a perfect picture of the countryside? Notice it is Irish-speaking (though his Irish words are inaccurate, especially brosna). It is the Ireland without sin that lived in Sheehan's heart. The observant eyes were controlled by a spirit that felt for the people as they should be and mostly are. Luke was out of touch. " He could never understand why the people should not fit in their ideas with his, or the necessity of proceeding slowly in uprooting ancient traditions, and conserving whatever was useful in them." There is the tragedy. It is a picture of Ireland as Sheehan saw it, and Ireland still stands perplexed. We cannot study minutely all Sheehan's writings to discover his breadth of view and critical spirit. A summary may be quoted from the end of The Triumph of Failure. "And yet I have slowly understood that the dignity of the Church is derived not so much from the erudition of her sons, or the wonder-working labours of her apostles in the domains of science and art and literature, as from the manner in which she stooped down and addressed herself to meeting the more vulgar wants of humanity. Yes, there is a Christian realism as well as a Christian idealism ; a realism that comes 
down from the loftiest realms of speculative thought to the deepest abysse of human infirmity; a realism that searches with no profane curiosity into hidden places, but only seeks them to enlighten them ; a realism that lays bare the wounds of humanity to heal them, the sins of humanity to forgive them, the wants of humanity to relieve them." That these tasks were no mere velleities Sheehan's life hows forth. These were the primary things ; his writing was very subordinate ; but we won't u e that as an excuse for him. A great pastor and a great priest the sought first the Kingdom. Then he guided his farmer parishioners through the triumph of land purchase, he fed and lifted up the poor, he talked eloquently beside his friend, Lord Castletown, on the Feis platform to propagate the idea of the new Ireland, he wrote the finest leading articles of the day in William O'Brien's paper, The Cork Free Press, he handed over all his literary earnings to his bishop for the sick priests' fund, and then returned to his enclosed garden under the cedars and the stars. In looking up to the tars, in understanding, he praised God for all, gazed with melancholy on Ireland's vices, and foretold the Ireland of his dreams. If any Irishman could look into his heart and find Ireland it was Sheehan. He was querulous, fearful, sensitive to the dangers that might beset her path as when he ang: 
hall we forget ? Shall valour be unhymned, hall pomp and pride obliterate the past ? Or shall th'ensanguined records be undimmed, As long as Banba's rugged shores are rimmed In foam, from winds unreined, and surges vast. Ah, shall thy glory blind thee, and thine eyes 
No longer see the martyr' crown and loss ? Steal from thy embroidered robes a prize (The petty theft thy greatness will despise.) Bow to thy sceptre, but I kiss thy cross. 
A conception of the future is there in grim contrast with "AE's." Sheehan bared his heart to our people, and it trumpets the last rally : courage, and persevere in the tradition of the saints. 
His charity
Sheehan's purpose of steering clear without wounding charity, and the necessity he saw of being very accurate in drawing his characters, were both fulfilled according to his powers without challenge. Yet we must admit with the American Holmes that his fashionable people were not realistically drawn. His villains amongst the landlord class and the capitalists are mere puppet . This was the fault of his quality, love for the poor. He declared himself his difficulty in dealing with questions of socialism was that his sympathies were with the labouring classes. His charity was faintly blurred in two other ways in his writing - when dealing with critics in general and with his political opponents. There were extenuating circumstances and he was the child of his time. But in voicing his complaints he dealt magnificently with his opponents. In following O'Brien's policy of Conference, Conciliation, and Consent he was voicing the charity that was in the heart of the priest. " I belong," he says, " to the Thomas Davis school of politics which would band all Irishmen in one common phalanx for the betterment of our common country." Then he murmurs: " Father Finlay and Sir Horace Plunkett would be almost alarmed to find how far they have made the fine 
old Irish people a ' commercial ' nation." He feared Celtic idealism, which saved us hitherto, had given way before the advance of materialism. The parliamentary party of the time was for him committing a kind of sacrilege in trespassing on that Holy of Holies-the human conscience, and he was " in a state of silent fury " against their insolent domination. He would resent any attempt to interfere with his principles or convictions in political or social matters, yet he avers, " whenever the Eternal speaks (and every day I am becoming more overwhelmed with a sense of His Omnipresence) either through direct inspiration, or through the Vicariate He has established on this little planet of ours, I am a little child : or as Pasteur said : ' I have the faith of a Breton peasant ; and if I live much longer, I shall have the faith of a Breton peasant's wife.' " He enlarged on this theme in his leading articles for O'Brien's paper. It gives us a shock to see the philosopher who was star-gazing go down into the arena of politics. He deplores that " those patriots of the past, whose motives were sublime, even if their methods were impracticable, are now scorned as ' hillsiders ' and ' tinpikers.' No wonder that the young men of our generation look on in blank amazement, no wonder they ask for some guidance- some voice that will tell them whither we are tending ; some new and powerful influence that will keep the flame of patriotism from dying down into dead ashes in their hearts. It is well-known to the writer of these lines that such is the case." These are a few words from the leading article that one morning early in the year 1910 the citizens of Cork read at their breakfast tables. Was he reading the " mosquito " press, Sean MacDermott's Irish Freedom founded in the same year? or Arthur Griffith's Sinn Fein ? It 
would appear not. He certainly was watching the literary revival in Cork at the time. An unnamed visitor (I am sure it is Mr. D. L. Kelleher) to Doneraile in an exquisite pen-portrait of the parish priest says : " I felt, at once, how fine a leader he would have been for the younger school of writers in Munster whom he longed to meet, and whose rise he watched with a tremendous interest. He asked me particularly about T. C. Murray, the dramatist, and Daniel Corkery, the leader of the literary revival at Cork. It was plain that he was anxious to meet both men, but the modesty bred of restricted environment kept them apart." Sheehan's charity was tempered by his sense of justice, and yearned for the practical while reaching out to the future. He had already drawn a delightful picture of a Protestant minister and his wife in Miriam Lucas. His strongest characteristic was sympathy. He had that sympathy for the Fenian and revolutionary in the past that was quite singular among the clergy of his time, that sympathy with the alien in our nation, and the Protestant, " the Cromwellian brood " as the recurring note sounds it, that sympathy for the iconoclast of literature which he expressed to the poet Sydney Royse Lysaght in thanking him for a volume of his poetry : " Of course the modern undertone of sadness runs through all, and the eternal yearning after the Infinite and the Ideal- the most touching and sad of all modern symptoms, yet one with which I, standing firmly on the shores of Faith, can readily sympathise. The great notes of triumph, like those of Dante's Paradiso, will yet be heard, and you, as so many others, will come into the harbour under the Great Pilot." His sympathy was so comprehensive that it gave him influence and won him affection among all sorts of people. And what drew men of every nationality and 
every religion to admire his writings was the broad spirit of toleration in matters of opinion and tastes that pervaded them. His Catholicity gave him that flame of universal charity and hope that flickered only to make it blaze more brightly. This side of the picture would be incomplete without giving one flick from his flail directed against " the great critic in the great Quarterly." The critic of some poet or other he pictures as speaking for the doomed in the " critics' inferno." " This lake of Stygian horrors in which we are immersed is a lake of printer's ink, worse ten thousand times than the fetid waters that float their bituminous and stinking waves above the fated cities." Thus he imagined his beloved Dante creating an inferno to which he committed the critics who hurt his sensitive soul. It was his great charity, nevertheless, expressed for the poor poet burned with the vitriol of the critic and also for those opposed to him in religion that made Trinity College men desire his acquaintance, on the one hand, while on the other, it urged Australian priests to cry out to him : come and be our bishop. He could not accept in either case. It was the will of God Who had marked him already for His end. The reforming influence that he exercised flowed from his charity for God and man. Ireland sorely needed to be roused from her lethargy. Sheehan desired above all to see his people great readers, a nation of readers of the kings of thought. He craved for hundreds of study circles. He raved about them. He gathered the young men of Mallow into a literary society. The Intellectuals is an attempt to create a story about such clubs "amongst the peoples who make up the commonwealth of Ireland" as he put it in the preface to The Intellectuals. There he failed and so has Ireland. We can report progress in many things, but 
the language movement has tested us. Because it is primarily an intellectual, a reading movement we have left it there in the hands of the faithful few. 
His literary methods
It is strange that Sheehan who was a great hunter of words was not a more fastidious stylist . It came from his approach to literature. Letters for him were an extension of his preaching crusade. We have no clear and definite idea of his novitiate. It was by accident that he became famous. He read so much, his mind was so retentive, and his will to do good so expansive that he learned to write as a duck takes to water. Writing came naturally to one who studied his theology and philosophy well, and whose taste for the great writers was formed in his student years. He wrote easily in a beautiful hand. That does not say that he had not to work hard. His industry is amazing as he had to fit it in to a busy life where he was the willing servant of all who came. " All successful writers," he says," are unanimous in warning off young aspirants from the thorny path of literature And dear old Sam Johnson, who certainly passed through his Inferno and Purgatorio before he settled down in the comfortable paradise of Streatham, epitomises his hardships as author in the well-known line : 
' Toil, envy, want, the patron and the gaol. ' " 
Sheehan kept out of gaol though it might have been his lot not for debt but for country. Father Russell and Father Heuser were patrons who were the only ones to encourage him, he tells us, though we must presume they were conscious the glamour of editorship of his work would give them a reflected glory. He was fortunate too in not suffering want. He was sensitive to criticism and got plenty of it to test his low opinion of himself. He did not suffer from intellectual pride. He had the timidity, the fearsomeness of the solitary and the student. But in identifying himself with the Church he found his courage and his style. The world he stood in was the world across the chasm of great wars. Yet it was the world of Augustine, of Thomas, of Lacordaire, of Newman, of the poets, the old world of the classics, and of the perennial philosophy, and of the Bible, and of the Church adjusting itself to the modern world of science. It was the world in which eloquence was the hallmark of great writing, and its ends to please, to teach, and to move to action. The touchstone was feeling directed by right reason. And it is feeling that makes men eloquent. Not a line he wrote but breathes this feeling from a great heart. It leads him to extravagance, mayhap, at times, but it always sings the song or wails the dirge in accord with Christian humanism, that integral wisdom of the way of life which right reason and revelation pour out on a fallen but redeemed mankind. The cult of originality in language, that chimera of a decaying English, did not trouble him at all. Borrowing consciously and unconsciously, he educated Ireland and is still educating 
Ireland. Though he expressed himself he went beyond himself, not concentrating the light so much on himself as on the object . He took such phrases as " the moonlight of memory " from Richter and dashed it on the page in the beginning as in the end. He took the Munster idioms that he knew so well and loved and made them come naturally from the lips of his characters. He even strove to capture the very accent by a barbarous spelling. " You always have the soft word." " Begor that whipster is playing her game well." " Declan is too studdy for that ." " The divil mind her for her tricks." " There is nayther sinse or raison in our stopping here." " The best of atin' and dhrinkin " ; and so on, through the whole gamut of living phrase that makes his dialogue realistic. He notes how the wretched Mrs. Oliver the Dublin landlady drops her syllables and her reputation for gentility at the same time: "Am I wrong in supposing that you are littery? " And that delightful old Herr Messing he can report to the last sibilant : " You are shildren, babes. You can fight like de teevil ! You can lofe like vhomen ! You can trust like de leetle shildren ! You cannot tink like men." His technique in the construction of his stories was huddled and overburdened when he dealt with life and action. This is most manifest in the one drama that he wrote Lost Angel of a Ruined Paradise, which could have been a splendid drama if he had had the stage technique. He is quite innocent of managing scenes and writes as if it was a story. Of course it is easily managed with one or two lessons, but he had no opportunity for it. Yet he wrote somewhere that he liked to give a dramatic finish to his stories. He moved with more skill when he came to put the convent on the stage, but, even here, he switches from Sr. Felicitas' cell to that of the Reverend Mother 
as if he had a revolving stage. This scene reminds me that Professor Stockley must have overlooked the eulogy of Gregorian chant to be found in the nun's mouth. " The Gregorian is infinitely more beautiful than these tiresome repetitions. Thank God that the music of the future is unquestionably Gregorian, that is, when we understand how to sing it as they do at Solesmes." But when Sheehan constructed his priest stories and the drama in the human mind he was as sound in his technique as the best of our Irish novelists. 
His humour
The reader is so penetrated with the sense of humour that Sheehan possessed, that one can see it not only in all his works of fiction ; but even in Under the Cedars and Parerga, what I have called the impishness of Sheehan, everywhere springs up like Ariel in the Tempest. The good humour surrounding Luke Delmege in the company of the three inseparables is found throughout all his dialogues among the clergy. And it is seasoned with wit. "But Luke, old man, are you really alive ? " " Alive and doing fairly well," said Luke laughing (when he had refused the sherry). " Ab actu ad esse valet consecutio. And if this is not actuality, I'd like to know what is." "There now for you," said the host, " he has the dust of the desks in his mouth yet. Begor, I suppose now I could hardly remember to translate that ." " Don't try," said Father Tim, " nothing disturbs the digestion so much as serious thought." " Faith, 'tis true for you. I'll let it alone. I'm better engaged. Mary, have that bit of. mutton ready when I ring." 
But my favourite piece of humour is Darby's proposal for Nonie in Lisheen to be taken with the scene at the end of the book showing Darby's failure to distinguish between " the immortal twins." He could no more recognise Jerry from Dan than he could distinguish Castor from Pollux in the skies. And here too Sheehan has the original observation that the Irish will call their children after only two of the major prophets Jeremiah and Daniel, and you could imagine what would happen to youngsters called Isaias or Ezechiel. In Seamus O Grianna's Donegal Gaelic I find these humorous sallies of Sheehan take on a new quaintness. This about Darby's moustache almost justifies the brokenbacked sentence if it can be ever justified, and then one wonders will the word sabreur take root in Irish as garcon did before it ? " Nó tá sin air anois croimbéal diasach ruadh chómh fiadháin le ceann a bhéadh ar sabreur Franncach." The chapel woman in My New Curate gives us another characteristic passage of humour now known in almost every household. The wise sarcasm Sheehan put into the mouth of fools like Coppal in Miriam Lucas has its own melancholy humour or irony. He is full of that peculiar Irish trait of quiet humour about the most holy things. " 'Twas aiqual to any two Masses I heard before," says the farmer on Easter Sunday, who was present at High Mass for the first time. " And the boys bolted at the Alleluias of the Ite Missa Est, as is usual all the world over. But they made up for it. For here under my window, all the week, they are shouting alleluia whenever they peg a top or hit a marble." While he poked fun at his fellow-Irishmen, and especially priests, as in that sudden demand of the dapper priest to the young Levite- " Could you give me a free rendering of the first verse of the hymn for Terce Nunc sancte nobis spiritus," he also looked at the 
Englishman with humorous eyes, and then he could make Luke exclaim : " Bah, there is only a sheet of tissue-paper between the two races." Where he gathers all his fun and humour together is in the imitation of the Divine Irony that pervades his stories, that can save the proud intellect with the word of a child, or make the drunken patriot shouting for his country murder the man who has suffered really for his country and desires to raise her up while he is so struck down. 
Essayist and poet
We may look on those superb collections, Under the Cedars and the Stars and Parerga, as a series of essays in which Sheehan looks the world in the face and discusses everything with the poise and balance of the Catholic priest. A characteristic chain of thought is this. Carducci's Hymn to Satan is quoted and it leads him on through the necessity of censorship to science and out to the majesty of law as shown in the Divine Governance of the world. Why, in the universe that is bounded everywhere by law, should the human mind alone be lawless ? These papers are invaluable for introducing our people to the delights of philosophy and literature, and giving them a lead which is needed more than ever in interpreting life in terms of religion and right reason. It is uncanny how he anticipated thought that lay yet in the womb of time. " Two things fill me with perpetual surprise- the existence in this practical age of a parliament, or talking-house, and the descent of such thinkers and writers as Mr. Balfour and Mr. Morley from the dignified and sacred retirement of their libraries to the vulgar controversies that rage across the floor of the House of Commons.'' And the meditation goes on as far as the questions : " What is it all ? Where is the fascination ? And where is the reward ? It may be the possibility of acquiring honours . . . But then- what can a philosopher care for a piece of ribbon, or an empty title ? · It cannot. be money . . . Can it be patriotism ? . . . Or is it, after all, a kind of superfluous energy, that, tired with the monotony of thought, seeks the variety of action . . . . Whether after. all, ' the game is worth the candle ' ? . . . There is a good deal of wisdom in the ancient inscription over the Grecian temple : 'Be bold ! Be very bold ! Be not too bold ! Your lot in life may be cast amongst cowards ; and then the world is a cheese. But it may also be cast amongst strong men ; and then the world is a granite quarry.' " Following on that little essay he records his visit with Ussher to the mammoth caves of Castlepooke where he " was travelling through centuries that would have seemed the links in the interminable chain of antiquity, only that Time, too, no matter how hoary and rusty, is but the youngest child of Eternity." He chronicles afterwards the effect the piece of stalagmite Mr. Ussher gave him as a souvenir had on children and then he concludes : " I brought it home, and exhibited it next day to more advanced thinkers, pointing out the eight different layers of granulated and crystallised carbonate of lime. I was then rash enough to state that, to form a layer of carbonate of lime one-twentieth of an inch thick from raindrops, percolating through the roof of a cave, would take from two hundred to two hundred and fifty years ; and therefore that that piece of stalagmite was in course of formation about seven or eight thousand years ! They smiled at me with a patronising air of incredulity. Clearly science is not going to conquer the world by a magnificent coup de main." The human easy touch here is not unfair comment because he had already 
given his due praise to the antiquarian Ussher. Though his essays may be dated, they are perennially fresh because they pursue the theme : our happiness is not to be sought in our circumstances but in ourselves. The happy life of the student who is in such close relation with the unseen that he might be imagined as putting out his hand and touching that world, while he searches all the plain things and the mysteries of this, stands up out of these eternal hills and valleys that unroll in these manuscripts, as the lighthouse stands up out of the dim background of the land. One may fall in love with the masterpieces he examined, but the light flashes over the waves revealing the dangerous rock, the passing ship, the brown fishing boat, the tramp steamer or the man-of-war. One may fall in love with masterpieces but what if they are barren- the curse of all that has originated in mere art ? Sheehan's mind was essentially poetic in the sense of idealistic and romantic, though these terms seem to be worn out. His stories are full of a yearning after perfection not only for the priest but for the layman. The one drama of his is a conversation, a dialogue that tries to eliminate from life and art the lost angel of a ruined paradise, by threading the lines of fate on a pattern of his own. We recall that Shaw's masterpieces are all dialogues that try to create a Puritan and socialistic world. We wonder if the Irishman can write an objective masterpiece. " The more poetic the truer," Sheehan had in his notes, if " poetry means absolute reality." The longest poem he has written, Sentan the Culdee, has a tremendous fundamental drama at its heart. It pictures a hermit doing penance 
" on this beetling crag ·Whose forehead touches Heaven's vestibule," 
which was on the southern coast because his abbot had given him this respite in his banishment, 
" Once and again, thou mayest near approach The cells, where dwell the brethren of Ardmor To shrive thee, and receive the Paschal Guest." 
But why this punishment ? A sin of pride in the scriptorium. 
" But one day dreaming o'er a faultless blue, That rivalled heaven on its sunniest day, And thinking would I blend it with my gold, Or would the gentler silver suit it best A roll was placed before me to inscribe." 
" all the hidden lore Of Egypt, and of India and of Greece Slept in this vellum, till I dreamed and dreamed, And let my fancy wander libertine To questionings of God and all His works. 
" Vexed with such subtleties of thought as these I rifled all the cabinets of God And in a lethargy of ecstacy Probed every secret cell of my own soul Dived into hidden crypts and even there Unheeding the dread sacrilege and sin I sought for fragments of a life divine Flowing in torrents from the throne of God.  
"A form of blinding light before me stood, Looked at me, beckoned : I arose and went To a great gate, annealed with storm and fire. He smote it with his flaming sword and lo ! The kingdom of the lost- the murkiness of hell. 
" And a great light broke in upon their minds That I, even I, was yet in truth a priest. A great hope shone from out their sunken eyes. For 'twould appear the hope traditional The Mass in Hell will quench its burning fires Leans upon Mary's Mass- no other rite Hath such celestial fire and potency. 
" The rite progressed . I took the host into my trembling hands Blessed it, and with white and tremulous lips I tried to speak the dread and sacred words But lo, my parched tongue clave unto my mouth. 
" My memory failed, not one weak word That veils our God beneath His humblest guise Would leave my lips. All Hell stood still, I drew a long deep sigh and pursed my lips No, not a word came forth, but the white host Crumbled to dust beneath my palsied hands, The chalice burst, and all the ruddy wine Streamed on the floor, and flashed in ruby flames 
And ran through all the channels of the place And washed the thrones on which the princes sate. And God, great God, grant me that ne'er again Here or hereafter, shall I hear that wail That long deep mournful painful passioned wail That broke from heart and lip and curving round Swept like a tempest of untold despair Through roofs and vaults and architraves of Hell. I heard their tears hiss on the burning floors And I too wept, and woke to find my tears Had blurred and blotted all my laboured work, And- Abbot Ailbe stood- and gazed at me." 
It's not a great poem, but a remarkable essay in verse on a very remarkable theme. The audacity of it places it in the old Irish imagination. Father Russell calls it " a splendid idyll." A critic in the Freeman's Journal said it was a striking and most artistic piece of work and that some of the descriptions were " as striking as some of Browning's best passages." It is an early work of Sheehan's displaying all his weaknesses. It lacks the intensity that could make it striking drama. In this, as in all his poetry, his learning lies too heavy on the hermit of Doneraile. He told us he desired to write a novel of the monastic life until he found he was anticipated by Huysmans' En Route and La Cathedrale. The short story The Monks of Trabolgan gives us the nucleus of what would have been his most revealing dream. The idyll of Sentan the Culdee reveals his researches in the old world and also reveals the blacker depths down which his mind could go tumbling. Montalembert's monumental Monks of the West was a favourite of his, and in its many mysteries and histories there is a rich quarry of stories without touching the threefold squalor of Joyce's underworld that carried him back to classic Dedalus and dead Ulysses. If we need wings, we of the new Ireland, let us not flap the wings of the carrion crow of Joyce crying " Ireland belongs to me," to savage her 
and her religion, to drag them, with a sneer, through the pits of hell, but let us take the wings of Sheehan the priest, the uncloistered monk, and let Ireland in her word be the priest of the world, the monk of the west, to carry the unutterable mysteries of grace, and the whole graciousness of nature to what we will hope will be a new and better world. 
II Pearse the standard bearer
Once when travelling by train from Donegal to Dublin with Senator Margaret Pearse, the writer was invited by her to the dining-car for a meal. " Sure, I always believe in eating well on a long train journey." This answer made her remark : " That's just what Pat used to say when we were travelling together in Belgium." One prefers that entrance to the mentality of Pearse, the heroic, for many reasons. There is a danger that Pearse may become a mere legend, if he has not already become one. He is not understood, and he has certainly become departmented to the mere physical force section. Pearse had so many advantages and so many facets that we forget. He was in America and studied the Fenian detritus there along with the commercialised Irish-American. He was in Belgium to study the bilingual position seriously. We know how he was consciously dominated by his mother and the Irish tradition. Who has studied the subsconscious influence of his father's nationality ? Pearse said about his father : " Ni raibh se ró-dhona mar Shasanach." There is a world of meaning as well as humour there. Terence 
MacSwiney was more serious in his reference to his English mother in the dedication of The Revolutionist. " To my mother's memory, for the heritage of her great faith, the beauty of her living example, and the ecstasy of her dead face." Meditation on origins and influences need not detain us except to ask how much of the mystic in Pearse was English ? Like Newman in religion (and he was half French), Pearse in nationality went back to antiquity to solve a problem of to-day. An acute Spaniard has written as a commentary on our fight against the English that in winning out against them we have been informed by their spirit and character. Was it the failure of triumph ? Pearse was so original and powerful in his efforts in every department he entered, that we may make the point that the blend in him of English and Irish illustrates a comment in the classic of his friend and comrade in death, Thomas MacDonagh's Literature in Ireland. " Perhaps," writes MacDonagh, " the temporary abandonment of Irish has not been an unmitigated disaster, now that the revival is assured . . . the abandonment has broken a tradition of pedantry and barren conventions; and sincerity gains thereby." At any rate Pearse represents not only the best in the English and the Irish character. His greatest significance is that he is thoroughly European. Ancient and medieval Ireland, since Patrick at one with Christendom, religious, literary and chivalrous, revives and lives again and speaks in Pearse the ideal modern Gael. Pearse is that rare being, a king of thought and action. We quote from Desmond Ryan, his pupil, to whom every student of Pearse is much indebted. "Many men have been as superb rhetoricians as Pearse, perhaps as human, as generous, as kindly : it is certain that few men have passed from thought to action with so deadly a thoroughness and sincerity." James Connolly said that the Irishman strikes first and thinks afterwards. Pearse thinks and prophesies accurately and strikes, and his prophecy is confirmed in the sequel. We can perhaps understand the heights he climbs but how few follow ! Pearse and his writings are even forgotten and neglected by the Gaels. Some there are who despise his Gaelic, that hard-won mastering of another language. How could he avoid mistakes? Why will the pedants who know only the narrowed down speech of one of the divided Gaeltachts denounce him while they lack inspiration? They boast they denounced Bearlachas where-ever they found it, not even reverencing Pearse. G.A.L., a writer in the Leader, has expressed it bitterly, perhaps too harshly:
" Then when everything seemed hopeful, when the movement reached its highwater mark along came the ' native speaker' with his ' local dialect,' and his demand for his hire, his quid pro quo. The Dubliner was sneered out of existence. Pearse was attacked from 
every side. He was scoffed at for his ' stilted style ' of Irish. He was denounced as an imperialist because he appeared in a silk hat, and there was a campaign against evening dress and what was called the ' claw-hammer coat.' " 
He might have added Pearse was big enough, or small enough as you look at it, to advocate that they should have accepted the Irish Councils Bill, that he stood on the same platform as Dillon and Devlin to accept with them the Home Rule Bill. True he had a reserve in his mind. He was not what was called a constitutionalist even then. He was a militant Gael ready to use every institution within the country for Irish education and to gain ultimate sovereignty. Once you are in possession of your ideal, your ground and your advance is certain, and Pearse was big-minded in that way. That is how he is the modern standard-bearer of the Gael. That is how he made the pageant of the past advance to the creation of the future. Nothing would daunt him who was ready to use every measure. Some of the things he advocated he brought to pass. He edited a Gaelic paper. He founded an Irish-Ireland school. He made a revolution. And so for them he died. But many of the things he advocated we have not brought to fruition though we have the power in our hands that he did not possess. One instance and test of that is we have no weekly paper in Irish when you would think we should have had a daily long since. Perhaps no man since possessed his faith, his originality, his driving power. Leaving aside political considerations for the most part let us concentrate on our failure in the Irish sphere. Let us once more refresh our minds with the words and vision of the man Pearse. It is well to stress a point made by my former teacher Seamus Ó hAodha, in his brochure on Pearse. It is this. Pearse was the son of a sculptor and the brother of a sculptor. He wrought his Irish especially as if every word were marble and every work a work of art. Pearse was an artist in all he did. In his life there is a rich quarry for our great historical painter, while the artist mind of him is a wonder and perpetual inspiration. Sgoil Eanna is an Irish school in a sense not dreamed of in Ireland since the Flight of the Earls. So speaks Pearse, showing how he absorbed and was steeped in the historic spirit. We see him in Cullenswood. First it is a pleasant thing to be housed in one of the noble old Georgian mansions of Dublin, this Cullenswood House. He sees the generations of Irish folk through and behind this wood of Cualann. His artist soul rejoices even in the Georgian mansion, but transcends it and puts it in its place. " We must be worthy of the tradition we seek to recreate and perpetuate in Eire, the knightly tradition of the Macraidh of Eamhain Macha, dead at the Ford, ' in the beauty of their boyhood ' ; the high tradition of Cuchullain, ' better is short life with honour than long life with dishonour ' ; ' I care not though I were to live but one day and one night, if only my fame and my deeds live after me ' ; the noble tradition of the Fianna, ' we, the Fianna, never told a lie, falsehood was never imputed to us,' 'strength in our hands, truth on our lips, and cleanness in our hearts ' ; the Christlike tradition of Colmcille, ' if I die, it shall be from the excess of the love I bear the Gael.' " Many modern Irishmen are weary of our harping back to the past and in their enlightenment and wisdom they say we are fools to think we can revive the Gaelic State. But do they realise that on the analogy of human personality the national being must be consistent and must have a flowing or tidal continuity, which 
rejects the dross in our past and is ever striving to recreate and perpetuate the best in our tradition, to feed the flame lit by our ancestors, like the relay race that Lucretius pictures history, the story of the race, to be ? From the heroic point of view .Pearse measured the Ireland of his youth and found her wanting. Pearse, committed to the service of a cause, in the spirit of the heroes moulded the nation by his word and work, in the supreme sacrifice. Short as the time has been we can scarcely realise now what this sentence of Pearse meant then : " Even if I were not a Gaelic Leaguer, committed to the service of a cause, it would still be my duty, from the purely pedagogic point of view, to make my school as Irish as a school can possibly be." It reminds me of an argument of the moralists. Even if there were no reward of an after life, still the virtuous life is worth living rather than the debauched. Even to those who can see no reward in it the Gaelic League idea is worthier of adoption in itself. Pearse for his fertile ideas is the greatest educator in this twentieth century. The lives and studies of him the French have in the works of Mdlle. Etiennette Beuque and M. Le Roux we may conceive as powerful inspiration for the resurgence of that 
nation, our Celtic sister in a double way. For Pearse down in the valley sensed realities to be attained by climbing to the heights. This sentence of his goes down to the depths of his time which is ours too. " An Irish school need no more be a purely Irish-speaking school than an Irish nation need be a purely Irish-speaking nation, but an Irish school, like an Irish nation, must be permeated through and through by Irish culture the repository of which is the Irish language." Pearse was expressing the mind of the nation which could see no farther then than bilingualism. Though we cannot see much farther to-day, we are beginning to see more clearly that a nation can have only one language and that for us must be Irish. Meanwhile however must not the whole nation become bilingual before it becomes uni-lingual ? English, being still the dominant language, the process of banishing it will involve the necessity of every English speaker becoming an Irish speaker. While that process is going on the homes whose language is English will become bilingual before they become Irish. In places we have reached the stage where an Irish question elicits an English reply. That is quite common in Belgium as between French and Flemish. When an English question everywhere elicits an Irish reply Irish will have the upper hand. When Pearse speaks of Irish culture we know that he does not exclude religion without which, in spite of a modern world, mad since the Reformation, there can be no culture. Incidentally it is in the religious sphere that Irish will have its greatest fight. For those who must promote religion amongst the young, more than in any other department of education, language experiments are fraught with the greatest difficulty. Pearse did not leave this fundamental aside, for he says : " We are also anxious 
to build a school chapel, in order that we may have the great privilege of the Presence of the Blessed Sacrament in our midst, and of daily Mass within our walls." Besides, what Irish culture meant to him was not the narrow and exclusive medium that our opponents and even our friends sometimes conceive that culture to be. " With all our learning," he writes, " we are not yet as cultured as were the Greeks, who crowded to hear the plays of Sophocles; with all our art institutions we have not yet that love for the beautiful which burned in the heart of the Middle Ages." Pearse has expressed very profound and wise views on the whole philosophy of education. He found the Intermediate system, which was freer, a murder machine, equally with the National. To-day with all our theorising our secondary schools neglect oral education. A boy or girl may go through, the great majority do pass through, the mangle of the examination system without any examination of the beautiful human instrument, the voice, either in speech or song. The American system, built on the Greek tradition of hearing the human voice, puts us to shame. The National schools of the present are not encouraged to teach drawing. So where is the influence of Pearse? To what purpose was he artist and standard-bearer and greatest orator of his time ? Here he is European prophet as well" In point of fact man is not primarily a member of a state, but a human individuality, that is a human soul imprisoned in a human body : a shivering human soul with its own awful problems, its own august destiny, lonelier in its house of clay than any prisoner in any Bastille in the world." In The Story of a Success there is much more wonderful writing on the philosophy of education to which our 
people have turned a deaf ear. Let us hurry on to consider the positive side of his teaching whereby he challenges the Greek ideal with the Irish ideal of education. " It is a long time since I was first attracted by the Gaelic plan of educating children. One of my oldest recollections is of a kindly grey-haired seanchaidhe, a woman of my mother's people, telling tale by the kitchen fire-place. She poke more wisely and nobly of ancient heroic things than any one else I have ever known." She merely meant to amuse, but she pictured the foster children of a great king of Ireland who were taught by all the best chieftains ; and even the king himself enjoyed teaching them more than attending to statecraft. When busybodies were looking for him to waste his time they were told : " The king is with his foster children." And he concludes with the sweeping superlative : " in truth I think that the old Irish plan of education, as idealised for boys in the story of the Macraidh of Eamhain, and for girls in that of the Grianán of Lusga was the wisest and most generous that the world has ever known." He clarifies this conception further in his pamphlet, The Murder Machine, which was his name for the English education system in Ireland. " How often does an Irish vocable light up as with a lantern, some immemorial Irish attitude, some whole phase of Irish thought ! Thus the words which the old Irish employed when they spoke of education show that they had gripped the very heart of that problem. To the old Irish the teacher was aite, fosterer ; the pupil was dalta, foster-child ; the system was aiteachas, fosterage ; words which we still retain as oide, dalta, oideachas. " And is not the precise aim of education to foster ? Not to inform, to indoctrinate, to conduct through a course 
of studies (though these be the dictionary meanings of the word) but first and last, to ' foster ' the elements of character native to a soul, to help to bring these to their full perfection rather than to plant exotic excellences. " Fosterage implies a foster-father or a foster-mother, a person as its centre and inspiration rather than a code of rules . .. We speak of the ' efficiency,' the ' cheapness ' and the ' up-to-dateness ' of an education system just as we speak of the ' efficiency ' the ' cheapness ' and the ' up-to-dateness ' of a system of manufacturing coal gas. 'We shall soon reach a stage when we shall speak of the ' efficiency ' the ' cheapness ' and the ' up-to-dateness " of our system of soul-saving ... " Education is as much concerned with souls as religion is . . . And as we cannot think of religion without a Person as its centre, as we cannot think of a church without its Teacher, so we cannot think of a school without its master. A school, in fact, according to the wise conception of our ancestors, was less a place than a little group of persons, a teacher and his pupils . . . One may think of Our Lord and His friends as a sort of school : was He not the Master and were not they His disciples? That gracious conception was not only the conception of the old Gael, pagan and Christian, but it was the conception of Europe all through the Middle Ages. Philosophy was not crammed out of textbooks, but was learned at the knee of some great philosopher ; art was learned in the studio of some master-artist, a craft in the workshop of some master-craftsman .. . " . . . I do not know how far it is possible to revive the old ideal of fosterer and foster-child. I know it were very desirable . . . There has never been any institution more adequate to its purpose than that which, in pagan times, produced Cuchullain and the Boy Corps of Eamhain Macha, and in Christian times Enda and the companions of his solitude in Aran. (It) possessed in pre-eminent degree the thing most needful in education : an adequate inspiration- the inspiration that made the one a hero and the other a saint." So we follow Pearse into his studio where he shows us his own policy and handicraft : " In writing the Cuchullain Pageant I religiously followed the phraseology of the Táin ... In Iosagán I have as religiously followed the phraseology of the children and old men in Iar-Chonnacht from whom I have learned the Irish I speak .... if I gave anything else my picture would be a false one." He did not merly transcribe, he wrought as an artist. In other words he used selection and judgment. He transcended the Gaeltacht, as every great artist must transcend his milieu. Under the brunt of attack he writes his apologia and gives us the measure for all our writing : " The story which I now dramatise has been described by an able but eccentric critic as a 'standard of revolt.' It was meant as a standard of revolt, but my critic must pardon me if I say that the standard is not the standard of impressionism. It is the standard of definite art form as opposed to the folk form. I may or may not be a good standard bearer, but at any rate the standard is raised and the writer<> of Irish are flocking to it." It was the Rev. Dr. Henebry who evoked this splendid statement of Pearse's. However, he need not have been so much afraid of being called an impressionist. Impressionism is not an old word but one borrowed from the realm of painting and not found in all the dictionaries. By now it has become respectable to acknowledge that impressionism has exercised a noted influence on painting and revivified that art. Impressionism may well be realism rescued 
by interpretation. Impression first meant the printing of a copy. All literature may be looked on as impressionism in these two ways. Impressionism in letters will mean literature that has vision, which means the outpouring of genius drunk with the light of God, guided by art interpreting the world and man in terms of the only reality. All things come from God, every eye hungers for God, and so " Nature is the Art of God." If a writer has any grace in him or gratitude for His gifts he will with joy and serenity stand forth like Pearse- a real impressionist interpreting the sorrows and the joys of man. Christ the Parable Craft man is the real model, and He drew from the heart of the Bible. I can think of no book as " impressionist " as the Bible, in the sense laid down. True, Leo XIII has called it God the Father's letter to humanity, but for matter and form in the now accepted meaning of these words the Scriptures are perennial wells and yet but the impressionism of Heaven and the Throne of God. In the pages of Bonaventura, dealing with the significance of Father Peter O'Leary and Dr. Geoffrey Keating, I tried to show the necessity for revaluing Keating without losing the best in O'Leary or imitating the worst in Keating, the necessity for a new and definite national standard instead of a dialect standard for the Irish language of to-day and the future. I asked for a new infusion of the historical language into the style of our writers and the brooding of the Holy Spirit over their creation. Pearse is manifestly our standard-bearer and philosopher who will weld all our ideas into one. Pearse's life and death should be the theme of not one but several dramas. His words should be broadcast every day from Radio Eireann. " It is the standard of definite art form as opposed to the folk form." Pearse's definite stand against his critics who saw sentimentalism in his
writings needs still more stress. Iosagán, he insisted, he wrote for a definite place and people. He appeals to experience to show that we need not be ashamed but glory in expressing our religion in our writings. " I know a priest," he writes, "who believes that he was summoned to the death-bed of a parishioner by Our Lord in Person ; and there are many hundreds of people in the countryside I write of who know that on certain nights Mary and her Child walk through the villages and if the cottage doors be left open enter and sit awhile at the firesides of the poor." Was Pearse then " namby-pamby," " goody-goody " to use those horrible cliches with which certain efforts of our writers are " hooshed " out the nation's door ? In Cullenswood he felt : " The city was too near, the hills were too far." Cullenswood House, even with all its associations, "gave no scope for that outdoor life, that intercourse with the wild things of the woods and the wastes (the only things in Ireland that know what freedom is) ." Here we have a thought elaborated in Terence MacSwiney's Music of Freedom. Pearse believed that moral discipline should bring with it physical hardening. He returns again and again to that theme which shows us that religion must not make us soft. " And I am seeing to it that all our lads learn to shoot, to fence, to march, to box, to wrestle and to swim . . . Every day I feel more certain that the hardening of her boys and young men is the work of the moment for Ireland." The mind of Pearse was heroic and his body was trained in the same mould because body is controlled by spirit. That is why he went so far, and that is why we have lagged behind. " I have constantly found," he writes, " that to desire is to hope, to hope is to believe, and to believe is to accomplish," 
He sums up his philosophy as we follow him southwards to the Hermitage, Rathfarnham, the new home of his school. " St. Enda's has now as noble a home as any other school in Ireland can have had, either in old time or new ; and Cullenswood House shelters its sister-school of St. Ita's. Then the adventure of three years ago is seen to have been the forerunner of a new order ; and An Macaomh, hitherto the organ of a school, becomes in some sense the organ of a movement." When he receives the counsel of a wise man that he should not have begun the school or the movement if he couldn't guarantee its permanence or see its issue, he declares, " That philosophy would condemn most of us to stand still till we rot." Pearse was like the saints in that he had an unbounded belief in the Providence of God and the bounty of friends inspired by God. He was always in debt. He justified himself with the story of the parish priest who wanted to build a church and sought a loan from the bank manager. The manager asked what security he had. "St. Joseph will see you paid," said the priest. " St. Joseph is an estimable saint," said the manager, " but unfortunately he is not a negotiable security." The mot passed into a proverb among the commercial folk of Dublin, and the bank manager gained the reputation of a wit. Both bank manager and priest have since gone down to dusty death ; but the priest's dying eyes saw his church walls rising slowly, and to-day the church stands, grave and beautiful in the midst of the people. The laugh, to speak without irreverence, is on the side of St. Joseph. So does the spiritual, concludes Pearse, always triumph over the actual (for the spiritual, being the true actual, is stronger than the forms and bulks we call actual), and a simple man's faith is found more potent than a negotiable instrument." So Pearse argued and consoled himself when embarrassed by debt, while at the same time he worked might and main to clear it off. So may lesser men, and prove themselves futile while Pearse's faith has made many a Sgoil Eanna. We can regard the insistence on the spiritual as Pearse's message to us although there may be some confusion about the connotation of the word in Pearse's writing if not in his mind. But it is all comprehended in the dictum of St. Paul :
" For the rest, brethren, all that is true, all that is seemly, all that is just, all that is pure, all that is lovable, all that is winning- whatever is virtuous or praiseworthy- let such things fill your thought . " 
Pious and holy ecclesiastics sometimes look on Gaelic enthusiasts as fanatics, when they should be influenced by the Christian philosopher in their judgment of us. So many there were who denounced Pearse in his early and later days and so much of his work remains to be accomplished that we need every priest to atone and become a powerhouse of the Pearse philosophy. This should appeal to us all. " A new heroic age in Ireland may be a visionary's dream, or it may come about in some other way than we have planned ... but at least this attempt has been made, this right thing has been striven after ... " In studying Pearse we are on fire with the flame from the forge of a great leader like some great king in a great crusade. His personality develops as he goes. " At Cullenswood House, I spoke oftenest to our boys of Cuchullain and his compeers of the Gaelic prime, here (at Rathfarnham) I have been speaking to them oftenest of Robert Emmet and the heroes of the last stand .. . " Emmet looked out from here and saw the mountains as Pearse sees them. " It is Kilmashogue (amid whose bracken he was to couch he night the soldiers were in Butterfield 
House) bathed in a purple haze as a yellow wintry sun sets while Tibradden has grown dark behind it." The evidence of the artist soul accumulates. " It is a strange and symbolic thing that the house in which William Hudson was born should after a hundred and fourteen years become the locus of such an endeavour as ours, and that his father's grottoes and woodland cells, though they never (as Hudson seemed to have hoped posterity might believe) resounded to the chant of monk or voice of Mass-bell, should re-echo the Irish war-cries of eighty militant young Gaels who find them admirably adapted for defence in the absence of cannon." He touches the depth of the Anglo-Irish mind with full appreciation of the lengths it can go, and judges it wanting at the same time. "The Bossi mantlepieces, the great spaces of hall, the old gardens, with their fountains and sundials, carefully walled in from the wilderness, all this has a certain homely stateliness, a certain artificiality if you will, not very Irish, yet expressive of a very definite phase in Irish or Anglo-Irish history. In such mansions as these lived those who ruled Ireland ; in such mansions as these lived those who sold Ireland." Then the humane Pearse speaks after we have heard the growl of the revolutionary ... " A prayer for Edward Hudson who made this home for us." Such were the surroundings in which Pearse the educationist strove to bring to his pupils that inspiration which he held all education should give. The hardening of his pupils he also sought here where nature itself teaches the truth that Pearse had before his eyes all his days. " It is murder and death that makes possible the terrible beautiful thing we call physical life. Life springs from death, life lives on death." Pearse the idealist is as terrible a realist as the German who held that war is a, biological 
necessity, but Pearse was thinking more of the Cross. " No dream is more foolish than the dream of some sentimentalists that the reign of force is past or passing ; that the world's ancient law of unending strife has been repealed ; that henceforward the first duty of every man is to be dapper." The scorn of Pearse for the Irish poltroon age in which he spent his youth is concentrated in that word. But his great just spirit speaks out in the words following : " It is the first duty of every man to be good . . . I am sure it is the second duty of every man to be strong. We want again the starkness of the antique world. There will be battles, silent and terrible, or loud and catastrophic, while the earth and heavens last ; and woe to him who flinches when his enemy compasses him about, for to him alone damnation is due .... We should train every child to be an efficient soldier, efficient to fight when need is, his own, his people's, and the world's battles, spiritual and temporal." We fail in our youth movement, because we have a poorer conception of education than Pearse's. How much we lack and need his enthusiasm, his vision. Ireland's Pearse with the dash of the Englishry in him lived up to the heroic in Ireland and Catholicity. Ireland Anglicised seems still to be living down to the minimum in both. No wonder he died so blithely, even so gaily, even so magnanimously. " Both Eoin MacNeill and we have acted in the best interests of Ireland." The man who fights and the man who judges the hour inopportune may perhaps be reconciled in Pearse's dictum in The Murder Machine: " I would boldly preach the antique faith that fighting is the only noble thing, and that he only is at peace with God who is at war with the powers of evil." Meanwhile we are waiting for the wave that will lift the intellect and not merely the brawn of the nation to Pearse's standard once more, 
And English is the blot on our Irish world. The courage, skill and Roman organising power of the Legion of Mary might be imitated by the Gaels to win this kingdom for Gaeldom. Pearse goes on blithely : " I have roused this Macaomh of mine again . . . Like those panoplied kings that are said to sleep in Aileach, he has only been waiting a call. I send him out now to publish tidings of sundry pageantries, pomps, and junketings . . . One does one's deed without thinking, as a boy on the playfield strikes for goal and whether one wins or one fails, one laughs . . . We have found these things compatible with hearts as merry as the heart of the saints, or rather supportable only by a hilarity as of heaven . .. it is our way of helping others to achieve sanctity . .. It has been sung of the Gael that his fighting is always merry and his feasting always sad ... a true impression, for the exhilaration of fighting has gone out of Ireland, and for the past decade most of us have been as Fionn was after his battles 'in heaviness of depression and horror of self-questioning' . . . When people say that Ireland will be happy when her mills throb and her harbours swarm with shipping, they are talking as foolishly as if one were to say of a lost saint or of an unhappy lover : ' That man will be happy again when he has a comfortable income.' " 
Pearse's acquaintance with world literature makes him a master of parallelism, like Chesterton, and what a light this parallel casts on his mind ! " J. M. Barrie makes his Peter Pan say (and it is finely said) : ' To die will be a very big adventure,' but I think that in making my little boy in An Ri offer himself with the words : ' Let me do this little thing,' I am nearer to the spirit of the heroes." So Pearse has been accused of " sternly organising merry-makings," and Desmond Ryan gives us an amusing picture of Pearse and MacDonagh looking for a page of humour for the magazine, with gloomy faces. But let us return to Pearse's attack on the Ireland of his day. " For a high, if eccentric, moral code, a glad and altruistic philosophy, a vision of ultimate beauty and truth seen through the fantastic and often humorous figments of a child's dreams, the teacher substitutes the mean philosophy of the world, the mean code of morals of the counting-houses. Our Christianity becomes respectability . ... " Ye men and peoples, burn your books on rent theories and land values and go back to your sagas." It is the effort of Celtic spirituality to strangle the British serpent. But the serpent crept ahide in the garden. Pearse we can see is at one with the Catholic voice but his expression is personal. He was not as great a philosopher as Chesterton or Belloc nor would he be as great a statesman as Salazar but his voice has the authentic ring of theirs in railing at the abuses of the moneyed classes, and he acted more swiftly and resolutely than any of them to wake up the world and to recreate at least a nobler Ireland. Indeed, when we view the undoubted idealism and the imperishable glory in the face of Ireland to-day, it seems we give Pearse too little credit for his part 
in moulding this generation. The neglect halts our advance. Many are blind still to the splendour that reveals itself. We are in the throes of a resurrection of letters, a new world of beauty in art reveals itself, and we have no upper classes, no aristocracy of the intellect, no Maecenas, no Carnegie with a Gaelic bias in him, to put out a bountiful hand of helping. Our freedom has not been barren. Even while we wrangled the Lord was nigh. The Spirit was moving over the waters and a new creation opened out like the dawn across a wartorn western island. " Beauty is the garment of truth," exclaims Pearse. And what he himself said of Yeats is more true of himself : " I understood then more clearly than ever that no one is so generous as a great artist, for a great artist is always giving gifts." It is absolutely true of God. A bhuidhe le Dia. It was a joke made about Pearse that he was writing " masterpieces to order." It would have been grim then, while it is satisfying now to add : " ' Pearse is the soul of this ' as one present remarked while the Republican flag flew over Dublin buildings and the noblest thoroughfare in Europe mounted into ruins and ashes." Europe moved on to another Armageddon that rages worse than before while no man can tell the issue, and Ireland at peace is a balcony over Europe, as a foreigner has remarked. Pearse beheld in the flames of the G.P.O. the threefold desire that flamed in his heart accomplished : to edit a bilingual paper-An Claidheamh Soluis (The Sword of Light) ; to found a bilingual secondary school-Sgoil Eanna; and to start a revolution-Naoi gCéad déag a Sédéag : 1916. Remember then with pride in his achievement that all his writings are unconscious autobiography. He sounded the depths of disillusion. He has been 
dismissed by some as simple, even mad. We have no more complex character. He seemed a harmless literary nationalist. He always believed in the ultimate appeal to arms. He would accept the Councils Bill or Home Rule as a step towards complete independence. " If they trick us again I will lead an Insurrection myself." He was antagonistic to Anglo-Irish literature though no man knew it so well. All may be unified and his complexity and simplicity reconciled if we do not ignore his source of inspiration in the sagas of Ireland, secular and religion . " Pearse's own works stand among the classics of modern Irish." They form so slender a volume that perhaps readers of today have been tired of reading them, but I can never tire of his poems even if they become a torment in the brain. 
Nior cruinnigheadh liomsa ór ; An clú do frith liom, dfheódh ; San grádh do fuaras brón Mo shaoghal do sheirg : 
De ionmnhas ná de ghlóir Ni fhágfad in mo dheóidh (Liomsa, a Dhia, is leór) Acht m' ainm i gcroidhe leinbh. 
Teacht Chriost 
Do ghlanas mo chroidhe anocht Amhail mhnaoi do ghlanfadh a teach Roim theacht d' á leannán d'á fios : A Leannáin, ná teirigh thart ! 
Do leathas dorus mo chroidhe Amhail fhear do-gheanadh fleadh Ag theacht i gcéin d' á mhac : A Mhic, is áluinn Do theacht ! 
There is enough to conclude with MacDonagh : " One need not ask if it be worth while having books of such poetry. The production of this (Suantraidhe agus Goltraidhe) is already a success for the new literature." 
The appeal in the stories of Pearse will never die. The tale of the origin of the exquisite lullaby "The Crooning of the Nurse" in An Mháthair will always wed Christmas with the countryside and the poignant agony of the mother yearning for children. The love for all the birds and their ways which lives in the lives of the boys of the country is forever expressed in the story of Eoinin of the Birds while it lights up that magic world of precocious sick children who dream of the land where it is always summer. These are my favourites though I have to confess that wonder always springs in my breast when I remember the production of Iosagán, when seen for the first time, by the boys of the North Monastery in Cork. We feel that what the Frenchman Rivoallan in his Littérature Irlandaise Contemporaine says of recent Gaelic literature, is pre-eminently true of Pearse's Irish works. " In a language like Irish which has survived the storms of oppression and has found writers and a public again, its every fruit is astonishing, every work is a miracle." Yet I must perversely perhaps declare my preference for reading the extracts from An Bárr Buadh- the Fenian Bugle, that little journal that Pearse used, to blow a clarion call to the nation. It seem to me Pearse revealed himself more fully in this terse, almost antique, Irish than in any other way. I still remember the thrill with which as a student I eagerly sought it in a Cork newspaper shop as it came out issue by issue. Most people will say it is just ephemeral. Yet I see in it the call to the nation that is needed to-day. The work for us to do is to take the crashing power of Pearse's hand and brain and hurl them against the King's English, a Pearse hurled himself and his little band against Dublin Castle. It was in 1912 that he wrote these words that I now quote; 
" We need a company of Gaels who will defend the honour of our race in the battle that is before us, and especially in the peace-time after the battle, if in the battle the Gaels prove strongest. We would impose a threefold obligation on such a band, first to gather the Irish speakers to the help of the Gael in battle because the Irish speakers are the most faithful of the Clanna Gaedheal, and they are the highest-minded and keenest in intention of all our living race. Secondly if a parliament is established in Ireland, to place there a band of Gaels unbought and that cannot be bought, a band who will stand for Gaelic right against the English and the English-Irish of the world. If we fail to win such a parliament now, to call on the Gaels to rise and to rouse them without ceasing till we have red war through Ireland . . . Though we fail and fail again we have to face the battle again and again. Till we finally break the English, the Gaels will have to send men to the Ford of Watching and Gaels will have to man the Gap of Danger. Gaels never lost anything in battle but their lives. Many a time and oft they lost their honour in the peace . . . Is it possible the defeatists of Ireland are right and the nations of the world wrong ? . . . There is the danger that a section who do not love the Gaeltacht of Ireland, who do not love the Christianity of Ireland, a section who sympathise with a thing called Communism (Cumannacht, perhaps should be translated ' Socialism') a section who sympathise with the non-Christians of England and the continent of Europe, will be gathering help to themselves if it is war in Ireland, and that they would govern the Gaels in the fight if they were allowed. We would preserve the Gaels from that danger. Let it be a fight if it is to be a fight, but let us be faithful to the Gaeltacht of Ireland, to Christianity, let us not meddle with Communism or any foreign thing like 
it, let us have neither hand, act or part with the anti-Christian of England or Europe. Let us stand together in a loving Gaelic way shoulder to shoulder, both clergy and laity, under our own leader in our own country to win out our own rights." That is the stark marble-like strength we find in Pearse's strong historic Irish. This classic forthright Irish of the Fenian Trumpet is the most grim and yet the most humorous writing of modern Ireland. Here we have the Pearse of the Gaelic mind and heart clothed severely in the authentic garment of Irish thought-a language that through Pearse's wide reading concentrates within itself the Irish of every generation. What a palpitating rhythm there is in the simplicity of this passage expressing the manly attitude of the resurgent Gael :" Tá Gaedhil i mbruid. So chucha arm faobhair. Sinidis amach a lamha. Beiridis air. Téighdis in a thaithighe. Beid suim bliadhan ag dul in a thaithighe. Gearaidis an t-arm. Láidrighdis é. Láidrighdis iad fein. Tarraingidis cáirde chucha fein ma's feidir e. Ceannuighdis cáirde ma's gábhadh e. Ar mbeith láidir a ndóthain dóibh agus iad i dtaithighe an airm go maith, músclaidis a meanmna, gabhaidis chucha bruth feirge, cuimhnighdis ar ghail a sinnsear agus gearraidis rómpa in ainm De." These writings are as ephemeral as Davis's essays, and the pity is that our journals will not grow crops of these ephemerides every day. How weighty with good practical counsel they are witnesses this appeal to the youth of Ireland : " The young men were not justified who while they essayed to defend the Irish language, at the same time turned their backs on politics. What they should have done is to serve politics through Irish. Politics would be the better for it and so would Irish. We do not say it would 
have been better for the Gaelic League in the beginning or now or at any time to meddle with politics. But every one who belongs to the Gaelic League should be connected with politics and Irish should be the medium in discussing political questions. If the young men of the League were stumping the country and rousing the Gael against the foreigner in Irish would it not be more profitable and nobler work than to be going around the country praising Irish with little or no heed paid to their words ? " How wonderfully fresh and fearless and critical is his estimate of Wolfe Tone ! " Is dócha gur fior nár mhuinighin leis cliar d'aon tsaghas. Ni thigimid leis san mi-mhuinighin sin. Ni thigimid leis i roinn eile dá thuairimibh. Acht cromaimid ár gceann agus feacaimid ár nglún in a fhiadhnaise, agus goirimid e thar ar sioluigheadh de dheadhfhearaibh anso ó dealbhadh Eire, ar mhórdhacht a anma, ar dhoimhneacht a inntleachta, ar mheid a fhóirithine do Chlannaibh Gaedheal." As for his collection of open letters to the leaders of his day you may read them again and again with relish. We need not comment on the well-known letter he wrote to himself or the humour of it. There is space however for just one that will appeal to all- that addressed to our well-beloved Uachtaran, Dr. Douglas Hyde: '' Life and Health ! "For a long time I have intended writing to you. I wrote some letters recently to worthy men amongst the leaders of Ireland and answer I got from none of them. I suppose they are too busy to write to one like me. Or perhaps my letters went astray. I addressed them in Irish and the Post Office people have a way of delaying letters addressed in Irish. If thi letter reaches you I know you will answer me for you belong to the class of people who are courteous to the poor and who listen to the request of all 
however humble. That humility was a trait of the kings of the Gael however rough they might be to the enemy. " I have no need to rouse you or to impugn you as I had when writing to those others. You never flinched however strenuous the fight. If you did your own followers would urge you on. That is a privilege the Gaelic Leaguers have, compared to the rest of the Irish. The least one in the Gaelic League has freedom of speech and freedom to complain. They have confidence in you but they do not think they have to say 'Amen' every time you speak. They are your followers but not your henchmen. Henchmen and pennyboys the rest of the Irish leaders want as far as I can see. I think you prefer friends and followers rather than henchmen and pennyboys. " Eoin MacNeill said some time ago that there's too much of the thing the foreigners call ' Red Tape ' in the Gaelic League. He is entirely in the right. But it's not that alone. I think that the leaders of the Gaelic League made a great mistake from the very beginning. When they began to rouse the Gaels they formed a copy of the political parties in contemporary Ireland and they christened it the Gaelic League. The Irish have experience of these bodies for a hundred years and they don't understand any other model. But however effective may be a big body and branches and district committees and organisers and rules connected with it to promote political objects I don't think it's a suitable organisation for promoting the objects of the Gaelic League. What is the object of the Gaelic League ? To make the Irish speak Irish. Which is of more efficacy for this end- on the one hand, a big organisation with its branches and its committees with their constitution and rule and it consuming its energy in making rules and debating all round and about them - or on the other hand, small teams travelling through the country, 
one of them singing, another producing plays, another lecturing the people on farming, another inciting the Irish against the foreigner and so on for the rest, while they did all that work in Irish ? " When the Gaelic League was established its every follower should have turned his back on the city and his face to the country. He should have gone amongst the people who had Irish and remained amongst them. He should have taken up some work which would have given him enough on which to subsist and be satisfied with that. The poets and performers should go forth and walk the roads and from house to house reciting their poems or singing their songs for the people and be satisfied with lodging for the night for their reward. There should come together a band of strolling players to perform their plays throughout the Gaeltacht . . . If that and more like it were done I fear some of us would be poorer than we are and others of us dead with the hunger and suffering but we would have saved Irish. And is not that what we wanted ? " I fear me it is too late to do it now. But some of it could be done. We could send that band of player to the Gaeltacht. Nothing else would be more for the benefit of the Irish language. It would do more for the spread of the Irish speech in one year than the branches and organisers have done for twenty years. " This letter is too long. I must finish. Victory and a Blessing." It is strange that the only one who took up that idea of living in the Gaeltacht was the artist whose exquisite house is an ornament in Carraroe, and whose children go to the local all-Irish school and who has a school for artists amid the greys and browns and purples of Connemara. Pearse believed in criticising the Gaelic League for fear of the stagnation of the 
Irish cause. In November, 1913, he wrote in An Claidheamh Soluis: " I have come to the conclusion that the Gaelic League, as the Gaelic League, is a spent force, and I am glad of it. I do not mean that no work remains for the Gaelic League or that the Gaelic League is no longer equal to work ; I mean that the vital work to be done in the New Ireland will not be done by the Gaelic League it elf as by men or movements that have sprung from the Gaelic League, or have received from the Gaelic League a new baptism or a new lease of life. 
Let me hasten to add that the quotation does not support the men of no principles that are articulate here and there in our island. If I single out what I may call the Dublin school of English writers, who have no hope for letters in Ireland except in their stylish English, I do so only for an example. The Dublin school of yesterday and today have no principles but the one. They'd sell their souls for a well-wrought phrase. The saying of a friend of mine has something to be said for it. They go on elaborating the same dull old sins we have heard of for the last forty years from that school, when earth and heaven are full of good in all variety waiting to be artistically expressed. St. Bonaventure's Magis veritas quam venustas would never appeal to them. If we were forced to decide between Truth and Beauty (which we are not) then let us choose 
Truth unadorned, because it is never dull to the clean of heart. The contrast Pearse presents in his personality and his writings would almost make us agree with the exaggeration of a priest who said Pearse should be canonised. Pearse is so genuinely and gaily on the side of the angels and the manliness that is like to Godliness that we should have a young school gathered in his name to study him and carry on the splendid fight he waged. O Padraig Mac Piarais, immortal English Irishman, would to God your words were read. Would to God your 
words and thoughts were burning in the heart and mind of the Gael to-day. Would to God we were not afraid of our shadows to force the chalice of limpid Gaelic into the arteries of the young. Would to God our leaders and our priests had your will-power and your driving-power that stood up against overwhelming odds. Would to God we might learn how to yield in indifferent things that we might gain in great. Would to God we had your hatred of the forces of evil. Would to God we were knit together in your love for Christ and the Gael. 
Photo The view from P. H. Pearse's window
