On top of the wardrobe in the hotel bedroom was a model Spanish galleon. The paper black-out shade twisted around the lamp like a fantastic Spanish hat, evoking a period, sixteenth century, a Gaelic order of life ready for the last great struggle with an England of the new religion, the hardening power of a despotic monarchy. I repeated to myself : Alas for him who looks on Enniskillen, with its glistening bays and melodious falls. Separated from us by four dreadful centuries, Tadhg Dall Ó Huiginn, you wrote that poem in praise of the hospitality of Cu Chonnacht Óg Maguire and the beauty of Enniskillen and the Erne. I proceed on my way. I reached Enniskillen of the bending oaks. Through the fair plain of fruit-laden branches, I was in no way loath to approach it. 
Nearly four hundred years . As for me: at Newtownbutler, where later citizens of Enniskillen once clashed with Jacobite men, an exceptionally civil member of the Ulster Constabulary, inspected my identification card. I reached Enniskillen of the bending oaks and had tea. An Air Force officer sat at the next table. I reflected that the Fermanagh accent, particularly in Kinawley and Garrison, is not a Northern accent, but an incipient Sligo accent, a brogue. On the long street-Enniskillen is really one enormous street-I met a man who for me crystallised the spirit of the place. Enniskillen people have a name for standoffishness, but he took me into his house, placed a chair for me by the fire, and talked until, out in the street, uniformed men went through the dusk back to their camps and their billets. He made me feel the proximity of Enniskillen, despite the new-fangled Border, to the bouncing life of the West of Ireland. He talked of fishing on the lough that sweeps in islanded loveliness down to Belleek, of drunken, swaggering tinker-men, cattle-smuggling, hackney-motoring and ignorant lads of " B " Specials holding up their next-door neighbours. No freedom now. A man can't go where he likes. I remembered that Fermanagh had once been not a border-county but a border, a line of lakes and mountains protecting O'Neill in that great struggle. Times and ideas had changed. Slightly depressed I walked the town in the dusk, waiting for the command and the question : Show your identity card. And what are you doing away from home? And, said Tadhg Dall, I see a lovely plain of golden radiance. The moist-surfaced lawn of the bright-hued castle. The soil of Paradise.  
Between sleeping and waking I said : " Travel between ten and four and don't crowd out war-workers." "What," ? said Tadhg Dall. "It has nothing to do with your poem. It was written up in the station at Lisbellaw, where lads fished for tiddlers in a black pool, where the fairy woman in the old song told the lover that love was a knot the heart could never loosen. " Till supper-time," said Tadhg Dall,' " we spent the whole of the lovely day in the bright, green-grassed, fertile enclosure. As one hour in length did that day seem to us." But no poet from a lost century may distract us into the past. We want the modern Enniskillen, visible in every line and detail, when the cold morning light hardens along the lake-water. In the hotel, Government officials and commercial travellers meet at breakfast, Belfast accents and English accents, naively discuss war propaganda and war films. The town comes slowly, watchfully to wakefulness, blinds rising like lifting eyelids, carts rattling in from the country, men and women going to Mass. Fort Hill lifts one suddenly to a vision of the long lake stretching to the quiet mountains, the loveliness of Fermanagh, detached and apart from all wars and human change, as beautiful as it was when the poet was welcomed to the chieftain's house. General the Honourable Sir Galbraith Lowry Cole, G.C.B., from the top of his pillar looks down on the town and the lake and the mountains as he has looked every morning since his admiring friends placed him there when Dan O'Connell was still in his power. The Lowry Coles may still be well-known, but the deeds of General the Honble., etc. at Nivelle, Salamanca, Guadaloupe, are forgotten as far as the people down in the street are concerned. Those deeds never were part of the place. whatever he may have been in life, gallant 
or a coward, short or tall, black or white or mulatto, he is now, stone or bronze, only a symbol for an official class ; just as the soldier clutching his gun on the war memorial in the street has given his mistaken valour as yet another symbol. From the head of Sir Galbraith a lightning conductor protrudes likethe feeler of a crawling thing. He broods over the town, the evil genius of the place. 

Derry and Londonderry 
The road runs northwards through Ballinamallard where papists are scarce, through Omagh and Strabane, and along the wide Foyle to Derry. At Bundoran Junction there is the splendid distraction of the way that leads by Kesh, within a mile of Ederny, by Pettigo and Belleek and the Boa Island and the long lake to Bellashanny and Bundoran, and the magic country that holds Melvin, Rossinver, Ben Bulben. Fermanagh ends at Belleek, where the Erne is severed by the arbitrariness of the Border. There are two ways of describing a town that has historical associations. You can detail the events of the past, memories that linger like an atmosphere, the pageant of men and their deeds made colourful and mellowed by the passing of years, until the actual life of the present is buried under an accumulation of interesting but misleading anecdote. Or you can look steadily at the men and women walking the streets, their homes, the windows of shops, until the veil lifts and you see, in them and through them, the past vibrant and alive. More than most towns Derry has suffered from haphazard building, narrow twisted, streets, rows of houses clinging precariously to steep hills. But very assuredly it is Colmcille's Derry. In the quiet half light of the Long Tower church or in the cathedral where children file out from school to pray before the altars, in the college, in the Guild Hall at Feis Colmcille there is nothing alien or war-spoiled in the city. Derry of the Feis has a genuine musical tradition and genuine wealth of musical talent. And anyone who thinks the queer flat accent of the place is unpleasant should listen to the singing of Mr. Michael Duffy or the verse-speaking of Miss Maureen Kiely. In a hospitable house in West Donegal I was once one of a party that talked, told stories, sang songs until the morning crept up behind Muckish, and the sea whitened around a hundred islands. There was a man from Derry in the company. We asked him to sing. "What'll I sing, " he asked. "She was the pride of Londonderry," I suggested. "The pride o' where," he shouted, his face crimson. "Lovely Derry," said I, dreading dissension in a Christian house. But there is a Londonderry, and its existence makes for peculiar cross-tendencies that complicate the life of the city by the Foyle, the life also of the whole six partitioned, counties. Deep down, Londonderry should be part of Ireland, but its vision has been twisted' by centuries of misrepresented and misunderstood history ; has in the last thirty years been given a new manufactured loyalty, in the last four years been invigorated by a hectic and artificial war-time activity. Derry as I saw it had been swamped by Londonderry. Streets were beflagged, shop windows filled with models of military aeroplanes, footwalks crowded with American and English soldiers, sailors, airmen. Military lorries streamed past under the shadow of the walls. Two black sailors walked rollingly down Lawrence Hill. I went along the walls from the Gate at the Guild Hall looking for quiet. The writing on the Walker memorial spoke of an arbitrary and bigoted monarch, of preserving for posterity the blessings of civil and religious liberty. Poor valiant, violent Walker. The men who suffered under his leadership found only in exile the liberty they wanted. The gallant story of their resistance has been made part of a very ungallant doctrine : employ no Catholics, a Protestant Government for a Protestant people, and so on. Does Liberty mean only the power to oppress ? Close to Roaring Meg a schoolboy cut his name on the bark of a twisted tree, working lazily in the warm sun. A little wind stirred the dust and the short grass around three guns dumb and silent for ever, pointing impotent muzzles over the city outside the walls. In the air above, a plane buzzed viciously like a wasp in a bottle. Londonderry could not between 1939 and 1943 (when the ban was lifted), march in procession. War-time conditions had silenced the drums, scattered the files of sashed men, folded the banners. All the energy that once went in demonstration went to warwork. In time the present war will become part of this strange tradition, falsified history, ignorance of the things that went to the making of the city. That is an unpleasant prospect for one who loves Derry of the oak grove, the quiet dark church and the kneeling children, the singing and the music and the Gaelic Feis. Derry found its economic and industrial power in the Donegal hinterland, now cut from it. Londonderry when the shouting of the captains ends will have memories of white ships on the Lough, swaggering sailors on the streets; thin porridge, when compared with the farm produce of Donegal. A man I knew spoke to me on the street He said: "The nations of the world are here." Well, the nations will go. There will again be closed factories, men without work, a city dying economically after political execution. Londonderry should raise another pillar to Carson and write under it : By this hand we fell. I clambered to the summit of Brooke Park, above the cathedral, above the whole valley, and looked across the Foyle to the hills around Maghera. Over there are families that have held their farms for generations, giving son after son to the Church, steady, reliable people. Over there too are little towns sullen with Orange politics: Ballaghy, Castle Dawson. Derry and Londonderry ! There was to be a procession that night, a legalised procession of fighting men. I took the train to Coleraine. 

Coleraine and the Causeway 
The evening sun was bright on the Foyle, on the hills of Inishowen, on white ships at anchor on the lough. At Limavady, where Colmcille came to save the poets, the flat green fields were scarred with concrete. A Spitfire dived roaring almost to the surface of the water, visible through the carriage window, then vanished as we plunged into the blackness of the tunnels near Castlerock. So, over the Six Counties, normal life has been temporarily lost in the activity of war preparations. The stranger could easily be fooled ; but the man who knows the country will see behind all this the normal life with its old enmities and loyalities unchanged; not, I hope, unchangeable ... 
Coleraine I found a friendly town easy-going like the wide Bann drifting from Portglenone to the disturbance of the sea. I did not see Kitty, nor was there a broken pitcher in the square around the Town Hall ; but I visited two churches, a new one in the diocese of Down and Connor, an old church in the Derry diocese, built on a hill looking down on the wide curves of the lazy Bann, built there by parish labour in 1834 in the first fervour of Emancipation. There is more meaning in the history of that church than in ninety-nine Roaring Megs. Portrush, next door to Coleraine, lay in spring sunshine recovering from its winter wind buffeting, a town designed by Providence for Osbert Sitwell to write another novel about. The whole world, and particularly the American tourist part of it, knows that the mother, 
of electric tramways still climbs that glorious coast-line by Dunluce Castle to the Giant's Causeway. Photographs, particularly the one with the yellow whiskey bottle, do more than justice to that excellent trade mark ; but no photograph could even hint at the grandeur of the coast or the goodness of the food in the hotel above the tram terminus. Down at the Causeway two American sailors and three American Red Cross nurses talked with a Portrush guide. One lady, opening up great ways in theology, mythology and geology, said : "Tell me, how did this thing get here?" Back in the hotel she kept up a quick running chatter : " My, what lovely silver they have here, and the tablecloths are ·much cleaner than in London." Friends in Belfast had advised her to see the wall of Londonderry and also Newcastle, Co. Down. The five of them compared the walls of Chester and the walls of Derry, hilariously interested in everything. I saw the last of them at Portrush whence the train took me by way of Ballymoney to Ballymena. 

Ballymena and the Glens 
A stranger will easily lose himself in Ballymena. The town apparently began life with a well-defined plan, lost its head at some time and ended as a complete maze. But the streets are clean and airy. A young girl told me that the people are great gossips, but all people are great gossip and in provincial towns they have better opportunities. I walked up Casement Street past the fine new Protestant school, built very much according to plan ; and, turning right, climbed up the old earthen fort that looks down on the twisting Braid River, on the town sprawling and smoking in the evening light like a huge lazy giant with a score of pipes. Seven 
miles away is Slemish. . . St. Patrick herding swine ... Roger Casement, the gallant gentleman ... And after that the historical memory of the town was lost as that hypothetical plan of its streets was lost. The very stones are talking to the vast Presbyterian and Protestant majority in this town ; but they will not be heard. A new school is built in Casement Street, as new schools have been built all over the Six Counties, for one religious denomination. The education of the minority here does not interest the Government, except under conditions that the minority in conscience cannot accept. Young Catholic men are dismissed from jobs, no offence alleged, no reason given. Gaelic football because it desecrates the Sabbath is taboo wherever the power of the Town Council extends. I pity the young man who is a Catholic and who is born in Ballymena. Yet the very names along this valley indicate a past incomplete contradiction to this suspicious, selfish present ; even a past that was both Presbyterian and Gaelic. Ballymena, Ballymoney, Culluybackey : the names run off the tongue like sweet water. They have never been altered to Middletown, Turftown, Beggarmenswood. They say that in the local Catholic parish hall the young men had written : Cead Míle Fáilte Rómhaibh. When the hall was taken over as a troop-billet a zealous Orange hand scraped out the writing because it was thought to mean : A Hundred Thousand Welcomes to the Romans. True or not the story is tonic ; funny and very pitiable. A local man will tell you that the traveller from Ballymena to Cushendall sees not nine glens but one. He will rattle off the nine names as a good classical scholar will give you a Vergilian hexameter. Be is right. The casual tourist in the glens is like a man who sees only at a distance the face of a beautiful woman, knowing nothing of the sound of her voice, the light in her eyes when she laughs, the little whimsies that make human character lovable. Merely seeing scenery is a step lower than investigating objects of historical interest, lower even than inspecting factories. The Nine Glens can show you many a sight ; and the man who does not hold his breath when the road sweeps down Glenariff, under long blossoming branches, the valley opening out to the blue sea, twisted ribbons of white water falling down straight naked rocks, is a man for anything beyond eating, sleeping and adding-up, as dead as Oliver Cromwell. But it is the little houses by Brabla Burn, the barefooted children who may or may not remember the Grace for Light, the great men who came from these glens, priests, patriots, scholars, poets, a hardy big-boned race, that really matter. Gaelic has lingered here, and ancient customs. The Glens are distinctive, like Connemara or the Rosses or the lost valleys in Sperrin. The writer limited in words can only pay homage to the Glens, the men and women of the Glens, the strong beauty of the Glens. Cushendun has a round bay, a white Hotel, a house with a subterranean entrance, a cairn on the tip of a hill, associated with the name of Shane O'Neill. A square stone bears his name. Other square stones have the names of Francis Joseph Bigger, Eoin MacNeill, Liam Mac Giolla Bhrid, Liam Bulfin, Shane Leslie, Sean Ghall. Those names were cut in stone in our romantic period and my own generation may have grown sceptical, or at least enquiring, about many things that that period swallowed, hook, line and sinker. But it was pleasant to sit there above the blue bay with the careless beauty of the mountains at my back, to contrast black Ballymena with those names written proudly on a hill-top to link up the centuries. Down the slope an old man herded cattle. I asked him: " Know anything of the history of that cairn ? " "That," he said, " was Shan O Nale's fort. Some boys from Belfast wrote their names there." " Boys from Belfast ? " Ah,_ well. The coast-road to Larne beats anything that Americans can say about miles of board-walk in Atlantic City. 

The Road to Dublin 
The Larne Town Council have made good use of their coastal position by building a fine promenade, little-sister to the coast road. The size of the town and the smallness of the beautiful Catholic church relates Larne to Ballymena, Portadown : Black towns all. There, as in Ballymena and Coleraine, I found friendly people. A man who remembered sixty years of the town's history said : " The differences between Catholic and Protestant are artificial." He did not mean -three centuries of religious divergence, the shadows of Calvin and mad Martin, but the more modern differences manufactured for very material ends. Wars have been fought about the meaning of a word, but they were not fought thus in York Street, Belfast. Voices encouraged the mob not by doctrinal discussion but by wild shibboleth calculatingly used. Where men are civilised and honest that reproach will always be justly made against leaders who could have acted otherwise and did not. In Lame you are twenty-three miles from Antrim town and Lough Neagh, seven from Ballycarry, five from Cairncastle, fifteen from Carnlough, twenty from Garron Tower, twelve from Glenarm, twenty-five from Glenariff, four from Glenoe, two from Glynn, three from Kilwaughter, three from Magheramore, nine from Whitehead. The tourist can go where he pleases. As for me, after Mass, I went to Carrickfergus to see the town that protested to a man when Orr was executed ! The town to a man was going to church, through a heavy Sabbath quiet. The waves splashed in the harbour below the monstrous castle. 
Across the street in the Salvation Army Hall there was violent singing ... .. In Belfast the rain came. The Boys' Brigade, authorised to parade, bugled and drummed through Fisherwick Place. The flat linen land and the land of apples : Lisburn, Lurgan, Portadown : was sullen under the low sky and in the rain. The way to Dublin went down by beautiful South Armagh, "galloping into the Gap of the North." I remembered The Circuit of Cuchullain ,and heard above the noise of wheels the galloping of wild hooves, suiting themselves to the very pulsing of the blood, steeping the mind in the wonderful antiquity of the land. Legends of heroes, tales of gallant Presbyterian rebels, hot rifle-barrels in the Dublin Post Office; these things stood together, accusing a selfish clique and a distorted, manufactured propaganda. A man in uniform asked me had I anything to declare.
