I remember Belfast as a phantasmagoria
of impressions, impressions
which go back to 1916 and the sudden
glow of sunlight on green plush upholstery
in a cobble-bumped cab, and
end- if they do end- with the dark blue
gloom of a recent ride through blitzed
Belfast in a comfortable trolley-bus : a
queer, disconnectedly-connected patchwork
of pictures, seen, for the most part,
through the eyes of a gym-tunic-ed schoolgirl
of typical Ulster antecedents. A
Belfast of riots, raids and rebels, where
mill girls wear graceful black shawls and
lay evangelists expound Jeremiah from
the Customs House steps.
* * *
The " Great War" meant a big green
map fixed with drawing pins to the
dining-room wall, a map which displayed
in large yellow letters the meaningless
words Lille and Ypres. The Germans
travelled in submarines and when we
crossed over to Scotland on a Burns &
Laird boat the stewardess put a white
disc in the porthole " for fear of the
Germans." There were " rations." All
this was " the War " ; just another of
the dull things grown-ups talked of over
the paper at breakfast. But war-talk did
interest us on the morning our elders
waxed indignant about something the
paper called " Conscription." It had no
clear meaning for a child who had only
reached the " A stands for Apple-pie "
stage but their indignation must have
been infectious, for I can still remember
eating my slice of bap and butter solemnly
and deciding that conscription was very
wicked indeed. But other things were
more real : Friday morning at the market, for instance. To be taken to the
market was a rare treat. I still remember
the mountains of butter ; the great heaps
of eggs ; the unforgettable smell of the
fish ; the crates of oranges and bananas
in the fruit-market and, most exciting of
all, the open space where potatoes and
pamfrey and old clothes " out of a
doctor's house, Missis, " could be bought.
Here, too, an intriguing commodity was
on sale : "Yalla Mon a penny a lump,
the more you eat the more you jump."
And Yellow Man, whatever the dim prehistoric
origin of the name, was a sticky
boiled confection, broken with a hammer
and sold in chunks. Unique stuff and
Mrs. Beeton had never even heard of it !
And sweet coupons hadn't yet been
invented.
The Great War, I suppose, meant more
contracts for Belfast shipyards and more
work for the mills and linen factories,
and no doubt more courting couples on
the Horse-Shoe Road on a Sunday, but
it was much less vivid to us than
the almost concomitant activities of
" snipers " on the Shankill and it did
not interrupt the pattern of our lives as
much as shooting in the " Bone." During
the snowy winter of 1920 there were
British soldiers posted all round Ardoyne
Monastery, " for protection," a protection
which involved night raids on Shine
Fyners. (Sinn Fein and Popery and
Fenianism all meant about the same
thing in common parlance).
I can still remember the queer, bereaved
feeling of three small children wakened
one dark morning to be told : " We've
been raided. They've taken Daddy," and
a very young and tearful mother whose
sense of humour reasserted itself when a
neighbour, who had called to sympathise
remarked : " Thon plant needs water ! "
Incongruous, in a house where the contents
of presses contended for floor space
with scattered papers, and the prop of the
home had been arrested, maybe shot,
"on suspicion." A night that had seemed
like a nightmare gave place to the desolate
reality of a sleet-drenched day. I remember
the coldness of that morning outside
the sentry-guarded postern-gate of Victoria
Barracks, where shivering women
with jugs of tea wrapped in cloths were
refused admission with a brusque " Orders,
ma'am." Perhaps it was the hopelessness
of this scene which decided one woman's
course of action. Her decision to go
home, put on her smartest hat and her
new fur-coat and arrive in a taxi to
interview the Major in charge proved to
be good psychology. Permission to see
the prisoner and to bring in food was
wangled and in the end she found herself
acting as unofficial go-between for
some of the other prisoners and their
relations.
In those days we young things became
acquainted at first-hand with the whitewashed,
quasi-monastic simplicity of
prison cells and the rough comfort of
guard-room fires. Once we took home
some of the untasted bread and yellow
cheese which was the unwholesome piece-de-
resistance of the prison menu. We
were able to visualise the billycans of
tea, the tin mugs and the enamel plates.
And we had a day of horrible doubt when
all the prisoners were removed, without
warning, to some unknown destination ;
perhaps to the " boat," the fearful
prison-ship in the Lough. There were
more majors to be seen and then one
morning we journeyed out into the
country beyond the suburbs till at last,
through high red-painted railings we saw
the little high windows of the cells in
Holywood Barracks, a red-bricked pile
bright against a background of snow and
bare, black-limbed trees. There followed
more permissions and many more such
journeys "to the country." Soon we
knew all about the sixteen prisoners in
the red guard-house. We brought them
mugs and mouth-organs and cigarettes
and handballs. We were sympathetic
when they agitated for exercise together,
and delighted when they were issued with
paliasses. One of the sixteen was a
communist and it was reported that the
Adjutant, a Wodehousian young man
with an old- school-tie accent and fair
hair, objected when he taught the others
to sing the Red Flag.
That winter of our discontent was
followed by a variety of interesting if
inexplicable happenings. There was an
occasional " picket " in our bouse during
the next year. (A picket to the young
mind meant a number of men who
stayed up all night playing " Rummy"
and " Spoil Five " and were heard to
talk of objects euphemistically known as
" lemons."). Sometimes there were unexplained visitors " from Dublin " and
sometimes news that so-and-so, with us
only yesterday, was shot last night . . .
In the midst of this activity we were
" boycotting" British goods and buying
Irish , symbolished in the main by Irish
matches, " Celtic " Christmas cards and
Belfast linen.
But more exciting than paper boycotts
were The Elections. No doubt there have
been elections before and since but none
that had the same quality of reckless
adventure. The adventure reached us
through the eyes of a seventy-years old
campaigner, a frequent visitor, who sold
us eggs and often had a yarn and a cup
of tea in our kitchen, a grand old character
called Biddy. As Biddy drank her
tea she gave us the election news and
to judge from the number of votes she
had cast " for the cause " that day, she
must have believed that the end justifies
the means. She had voted, with and
without false teeth, in a variety of
shawls, hats, bonnets and coats, and
once at least from a bath-chair in a
borrowed seal-skin ! Finally she had
polled in her own right with all the
simple innocence of a first voter whose
sight was not too good. Her only reward
was the hope that the " cause " was
the better for her efforts.
Biddy had a store of ballads but the
one most often in demand with us was
" The Old Man from Tillyburn Brae."
with its classical line : " It's true that
the weemin is worse nor the men."
Knowing Biddy's prowess at elections,
that theory seems almost tenable.
In those days we used to pin rugs and
blankets against the bedroom windows
to stop stray bullets. There was Curfew,
and with Curfew was associated the
nightly grind of changing gears, as the
patrol-car (known to us as the " Cage "
or the " Armoured Car," but really a
Crossley tender full of armed police)
climbed up our hill to Ligoniel. All was
well if it did not stop either then or on
the return journey. Sometimes a lorry,
or perhaps two, did stop, and the house
was promptly surrounded. On one
occasion a lorry had been known to stop
to throw the bullet-riddled body of a
young postman into the grounds of Ballysillan
House. That was a Saturday night.
On the Sunday people continued to come
all day, almost in procession, to see
the spot and to bring away blood-stained
leaves. That same night, too, the body
of a young publican had been found on
a side road. It had been a " roundup
" ...... .
The patrol car usually contained "A"
Specials and subsequent raids were carried
out by these gentlemen, aided by
" B's," under the control of the regular
police, and accompanied, on occasion, by
a lady searcher. It was usual for these
visitors to pocket anything that happened
to interest them, and then the man in
charge requested the householder to sign
a paper declaring that everything had
been left as found. Sometimes the losses
were not discovered for days, as in the
case of the half-dozen German razors
piled in neat boxes on the bathroom shelf.
The boxes remained but the razors had
gone ! And there was the funny incident
of the lady searcher who discovered a
peculiar bag of- was it gelignite? - amongst
the baby clothes in a bedroom
drawer. She fingered it delicately and
called the man in charge. At this stage
someone guffawed loudly and invited
her to " have a bite." It was green
ginger, hidden from greedy children and
since forgotten. After that they decided
to turn the sleeping baby over in the
cot ! As a result of one raid by" Specials"
we made the acquaintance of Chichester
Street Police Barracks, a Zoo-like place
where one peeped at the prisoner through
a grill.
In the meantime changes had taken
place. The Scottish and English regiments of soldiers had gone, it seemed,
and the armed Specials, some English and
some local, " kept the peace." And there
were other changes. There was talk of a
thing called the Free State. The local
butcher was a " Free-Stater ; " many
of the Catholics who expressed any
opinion were anti-Free-State. But it
wouldn't last long, they thought. People
came to visit us who had been in Ballykinlar,
where they had evidently learned
new songs, for one thing. And one quiet
elderly lady of old Fenian stock thrilled
us by describing how she brought money
collected in the North to Arthur Griffith
in Dublin. They had had a cup of tea
together and I still remember her motherly
solicitude about him and her regret that
he would not buy himself a new coat with
some of the money, for his coat she said
was worn and his cuffs frayed. Her own
boy had been shot ....
Irish classes and ceilidhes, popular in
the parish for a couple of winters, melted
away like snow before the sun. The
board which had read Holy Cross Boys'
National School was changed over-night
into Holy Cross Boys' P.E.S. And one
little boy in the neighbourhood who had
been Eamonn till then was to be known
henceforth as Edward ! New modern
central Protestant P.E. schools, to do
duty for two or three smaller ones,
sprang up here and there. And the word
" present " again took the place, at rollcall,
of a sound which had reached my
ear as Tommy Chaw, or perhaps Tommy
Chalk, but which research later led me to
believe must have been intended for "Ta
me annseo”. We fell back upon the
exciting story of Alfred and The Cakes,
the geography of the British possessions,
the English cotton towns, Clive of India
and all the rest of it.
The " troubles " were over for the
present. But the people who had danced
Irish dances and sung patriotic ballads
and hoped for a "brave new world" had
scattered. Some were still " on the run,"
some had jobs in the Free State, or preferred
to live there. Those who had been
burned out of home or business or bullied
out, in " the trouble," were disillusioned.
For them " Romantic Ireland " was indeed
" dead and gone." Gaelic Belfast had
suffered a second " Flight of the Earls "
and was leaderless.
* * *
But there are other and more stable
memories of Belfast. There is, for
instance, the predominance of red bricks
in any visual impression of the city. I
suppose bricks must feature largely
enough in the Dublin scene, but the soft
red of the Lagan-vale bricks is apparent
in church, hospital, villa, terrace-house,
kitchen-house, foundry and factory all
over Belfast. The terms parlour-house
and kitchen-house may be strange to
those who do not know Belfast. The
kitchen-house is characteristic, for there
are many streets of them and they house
a large proportion of the industrial
workers of Belfast. I can still see our
dressmaker's house, its shining windows
draped with starched, cream-tinted curtains,
its red and yellow tiled floor
scrubbed as clean as a de Hooch interior,
its spotless wooden table and chairs
scoured till they could be no whiter, its
blazing, black-leaded range, its bright
steel fire-irons, the pair of china dogs on
the mantel-shelf, the white horse in the
light above the door. I have been in
many a kitchen-house, in Ligoniel,
around Ardoyne, up the Falls, but in all
of them neatness and comfort were the
keynote. Generalisations are risky, but I
daresay the brass taps in the scullery
sink shone too, and the room off the
kitchen and the bedrooms upstairs were
as well-kept as the kitchen itself. And it
was not uncommon to see fine linen
sheets on the line in the yard, and lawn
handkerchiefs, for Belfast was the city of
linen. There was not much architectural
imagination shown in the design of such
houses and the repetition of street upon
street, grid-like, in the same pattern,
explains something of the flat, monotonous
character of the typical view. But
when two or more out of every house
were working there was no lack of comfort
within their homely precincts.
By way of contrast, the new residential
suburbs indulged in individualism of
every sort, from pseudo-Tudor doorways
and timbering to multi-coloured modern
roof-tiles. And the tendency was to live
outside Belfast, at Helen's Bay, or at
Ballyholme, and to come in every day
by car.

I can remember Orange sashes and
fifes in Shankill and Peter's Hill pawnshop
windows. But these were taken out
in good time for the " Twelfth of July
as it yearly did come " and they joined
in the general effort to impress one
section of seventeenth century European
history on the minds of the community.
The gates of Derry, the Maiden City, were
commemorated in elaborate arches across
the side streets. On the 11th there were
bonfires and Lundy was burned. The
cry was " Are ye for the fiel' the
morrow ? " The magic words " Remember 1690, Derry, Aughrim, Enniskillen
and the Boyne " blossomed in unfertile
spots. And on suitable street-corner
gables the local fresco-artists emblazoned
William III , " of pious, glorious and
immortal memory " in the celebrated act
of crossing the river Boyne on his white - or
should it be grey ?- charger. On the
great day itself each Lodge, its members
sashed in orange, or purple or black ,
according to degree, marched to the
sound of fife, flute and drum, and each
Lodge carried its banner proudly ahead.
The banners celebrated William's victories,
particularly Derry and the Boyne,
and I remember Cromwell in full mail,
and various Grand Masters' or Lodge
Masters' portraits, and, (why I have never
been able to discover) Queen Victoria as
Empress of India receiving a Bible from
a little black boy.
I sometimes wonder if I remember
scenes like this or if they have stepped
alive out of some Dutch portrait-group
of Archers or Civil Guards. Certainly
there is a similar gravity of expression
in the Belfast Orangeman when he goes
about the annual business of upholding
the Bible and the Crown and scattering
the Papishes, to the tune of Dolly's Brae ,
or the Boyne Water, or No Surrender.
Sweet William mingles with the Royal
Orange Lily to deck the scene.
Odd snatches of a song come back :
" But put your trust in Providence and
keep your powder dry."
Or
"July the first in Oldbridge town,
There was a grievous battle,
Where many a man lay on the ground
By cannon that did rattle ... . "
Or
" Old Derry walls were firm and strong ,
Well fenced in every quarter,
Each frowning bastion grim along,
With culverin and mortar - - "
Or replies like :
" We are the boys of Marrowbone,
Who fought that Orange clan
And won the fight that August night,
For Faith and Fatherlan' . .. "
And again, to a different tune :
"In Mountjoy Jail, one Monday morning,
High upon the gallows tree,
Kevin Barry gave his young life,
For the cause of liberty "
And,
" It was early, early, in the spring.
The small birds whistled , sweet did
sing,
Changing their notes from tree to tree,
And the song they sang was : Old
Ireland Free ! "
We were learning our history in ballads ;
the old ballads of 1690 and 1798 and the
new ballads of 1916. But outside Belfast
marbled Stormont was rising, a rich gift
from -England ; a gift which symbolised
and tightened new bonds. And " Ireland
Free " seemed, like the old handlooms of
Jemmy Hope's time , the old disused handlooms
in the white-washed sheds of old
Ardoyne village, a dream of the past.
Thoughts of the past, of a man called
Tone, of the gallant Belfast man Henry
Joy McCracken , would come and go
when we climbed the Cave Hill or stood
looking out across Belfast from MacArt's
Fort on a Sunday. And there were peaceful,
untroubled evenings when we walked
home from Benediction under the starlight.
But not even a school-child could have
lived in Belfast and remained unaware of
the urgency of the religious problem , for
it gave its peculiar characteristics to both
" sides " in Belfast. This is not a popular
view at the moment, especially with the
would-be tolerant Southern Catholic, imbued
with the teachings of Tone and
Mitchel. And it is true that there are
Catholic Unionists in the North, just as
there are Protestant Republicans in the
South but these are exceptions, for in the
main, the Protestant industrialist in
Belfast is bound to England by ties that
are cultural and spiritual as well as
economic. And from amongst the well-to-
do industrialists have come now, as in
the past, the leaders of the ordinary
working-folk, leaders who are often woefully
ignorant of Irish history and woefully prejudiced against Catholicism but
who share (or shared, in a past generation)
with their followers a very real pride
in Protestant civilisation, and in its
achievements in the English-speaking
world. And although the religious issue
in a generation may be of much less
importance, it was too obvious to be
ignored in the Belfast of just yesterday.
Protestantism, whatever its denomination,
was synonomous with social self-confidence in the Belfast I remember.
Belfast Protestants, whether they carried
large Bibles to church twice on Sunday
or stayed at home and read the English
Sunday papers, were eminently self-respecting,
respectable and respected ....
especially on Sundays. We kept Sunday
as well as they, or better maybe, for to
Sunday Mass we added a Sunday-School-Christian-
Doctrine class in the afternoon,
and in the evening, devotions, sermon
and Benediction . But we kept Sunday
light-heartedly. I remember being
sorry for the " poor " misled Protestants.
To them I continuously applied words
from a prayer we said at night as a
" trimming" to the Rosary : "May Thy
Kingdom come. Be Thou King, recognnised
and well-beloved over all nations,
not only over those who have remained
faithful to Thee but over those also who
have followed the Prodigal and have wandered
far from Thee ." I felt that, like the
Prodigal, the " poor " Protestants (for
all their wealth and respectability) had
strayed away from the rest of the Catholic
family. No doubt I worried more about
their salvation than they did about
mine ! And a childish desire to walk up
and explain the mistake of the Reformation
to the next Protestant one encountered had to be suppressed. For one
thing, we were carefully trained to avoid
religion as a topic of conversation in
mixed company and for another, such a
course of action might easily have evoked,
on the Shankill Road, at any rate, a
muttered : " To hell with the Pope" or
a threatening : " You bloody rebel "
backed up by a well-directed cobblestone.
Militant Belfast didn't wait to
debate doubtful points, and theology and
politics were inextricably mixed. But no
doubt the spiritual advantage of being
one of a persecuted minority is that it
prevents one slipping into indifference !
In time such problems melted into and
formed part of the bigger business of
getting educated. Books gave one at
least some extra-parochial contacts. In
the sphere of English literature we met
Yeats and Colum and Stephens and
Plunkett and Pearse. I remember that
my favourite poem one term was
Plunkett's :
" I see His blood upon the rose
And in the stars the glory of His eyes ;
His body gleams amid eternal snows,
His tears fall from the skies."
But I knew nothing of Plunkett the
patriot and was being lured towards the
pagan, public-school patriotism of young
Rupert Brooke, and dazzled by the word-daring
of that " humorous Gothic architect,"
Chesterton , who first awakened my
young enthusiasm as the interpreter of
St. Francis of Assisi.
Education tended to widen one's knowledge of things English, even if it had a
bias towards things Catholic and English.
The new-fangled " wireless" too meant
direct contact with "standard" English
pronunciations and " standard " English
ideas. " Big Ben " became as real as the
" Albert " and the news bulletin , " copyright by Reuter, Press Association , Exchange, Telegraph and Central News,"
mingled with the strains of " Home in
Pasadena" from the Savoy Hotel on the
Embankment, or the more elusive music
of the nightingale from the woods of
Surrey, to wean the young imagination
away from the " Belfast Mountains" and
a shadowy Cuchullain at a dim, prehistoric ford.
The B.B.C. introduced us to the Land
of Heart's Desire, to which we " listened-in," as requested, in the darkness, with
a suitably creepy feeling. There were
talks on James Joyce and Lascelles
Abercrombie and D. H. Lawrence ... .
but at school Tennyson's Morte d'Arthur,
Francis Thompson's "titanic glooms of
chasmed fears," and Shelley's "blithe
spirit " mingled with the dim echo of
" Don John of Austria riding " to a
forgotten war. And if Gaul remained
divided into three parts, Ireland was still
divided in to two . . . . . .
I don't know whether Belfast school
uniforms really are smarter than Dublin
ones or whether it is that Belfast enjoys
Dublin doesn't, but I do remember with
pleasure the colourful variety of blazers
and school- caps, prominent amongst them
the yellow and black of " Inst. " and the
navy blue of . . . was it "Methody" ?
Co-education was a feature of some of
the Protestant Colleges but there were
also boys' schools like Campbell College
and " Inst ." and girls' colleges, like
Victoria. Catholics in search of a secondary
education for their children had less
choice in the city.
The Catholic secondary schoolboy,
interviewed for a "job" frequently found
himself out-manoeuvred by the self-confidence of his rivals, or embarrassed
by the implication behind the simple
question " where were you at school ? "
For many excellent and God-fearing
business-men shared , and perhaps share,
the sentiment so well put by Sir Basil
Brooke when he said in 1934 : " I recommend people not to employ Roman
Catholics, who are ninety-nine per cent.
disloyal. " A misguided application, perhaps,
of the sound idea that there should
be an order in charity.
But such problems had not yet to be
faced. And on many a winter's morning
a sleepy school-girl heard the clang of
early trams bringing the workers (at
special workpeople's fares) up to the
mills at Wolfhill and Ballysillan. While
six o'clock in the evening saw York Street
and the Shore Road black with returning
fitters and rivetters and boiler-makers
and mechanics of all sorts, pouring out
from work on The Island-some twelve
thousand souls. There are special trams
on the Queen's Road. And every tram
is full. But what of Th' Island
itself with its great yards, Workman
& Clark's, Harland & Wolff's, built
on thousands of concrete piles over
the mud-banks of the Lagan ? It stays
in the memory like the gargantuan
dream of a meccano-minded boy . . ..
a forest of great steel gantries and cranes
against the sky, grey by day, black and
threatening by night, almost beautiful in
their naked starkness.
Once I was on board a liner before it
was launched- the Olympic, I think - a
great floating fairyland of red carpet
and light and luxury and long passages
and state-rooms and piled up decks. No
wonder a hundred ton travelling crane
was used to lower the boilers into such
monsters. And no wonder, too, that a
seventeen-year old school-girl, " remembering
Sion," smiled indulgently at the
Dublin schoolmaster who pointed proudly
to Dublin's "unique "- is it ten-ton ? - crane
! Is it fantastic to dream of an
Irish navy coming from the slips of the
Queen's Island? Who can say?
Behind Belfast's shipbuilding stood the
livelihood of thousands upon thousands,
and a chain of other industries : iron
foundries, rope works, linen making, and
even the crafts of furniture making and
upholstering and the trades of plumbing
and tile-fixing and painting ..... whole
worlds of specialisation.

But that was yesterday. To-day the
very name Harland & Wolff has become
Shortt & Harland. There is not enough
war work to employ all Belfast's workless.
The tallest mill in York Street is
a heap of bricks and mortar. One looks
from Castle Junction down old High
Street towards the Albert Memorial and
great, gutted gaps confront the eye. The
historic Whig offices in Bridge Street have
a shaken look. The shop where gym
displaying order and uniformity and
shoes and hockey sticks were bought is
nowhere to be seen . . . . . This is blitzed
Belfast.
A boy goes by shouting the " Tally,"
Belfast's evening paper, the Belfast Telegraph,
and easily the best evening paper
in Ireland. But there is no news- nothing
but war propaganda. The dimly-lit trams
- blacked-out, of course, and criss-crossed
with strips of paper-are bewildering. A
'phone-call in a blacked-out and bulb-less
telephone booth strains one's frayed
temper. The Grand Central Hotel will
surely provide matches. But the Grand
Central Hotel is too full of uniformed
girls and men to bother. American
accents are around one- and Belfast
accents, unchanged by years of radio-standard-
English. " Coffee, miss ? " " No,
thank you."
Out again, down Gresham Street in the
dark. In through a black curtained door,
into Smithfield, where, even on a Saturday
night one can still buy almost anything.
At a second-hand bookstall I
browse in copies of the Ulster Archaeological Society's Journal dating from
Frank Bigger's time. I turn over a book
of Spurgeon's sermons ... MacDonagh's
poems . . . de Senectitle ... a book about
Chaldean art. I spend a penny on The
Young Visiters, a minor classic, cheap at
the price . . . . One of the gramophone
stalls is playing a Delia Murphy record,
The Spinning Wheel .. . oddly suitable
in Belfast . ....
I have a ballad-sheet in my pocket- bought
in Dublin- The Belfast Martyr.
Would that be a seditious document? I
wonder.
