That which moves us most deeply, that which we love best, we find hardest to convey in words. We meet a man who has spent a while in the holy peace of Inchigeelagh, and he will not talk of it, for he has returned to common earth, where there is no language for what he has seen; or if he has sojourned in the mountain ways of MacCarthy and O'Donoghue's country, he cannot translate that kingly land into contemporary terms. A poet, indeed, has captured in words the timeless spell of the West, when he writes of the Seven Woods of Coole, and another has told how Ireland melts into the sunset at Renvyle ; yet these give us little more than glimpses of the inexpressible. To every traveller, the enchantment of the South and West, and the bewitching quietude of the Central Plain, are evident, though he cannot convey them. These magical qualities men think of as the soul of Ireland ; they haunt her exiles, and have captured generations of adopted sons. 
§ 1- The glamour of the North-East 
The North-East has laid the same nostalgic spell on travellers in other times: witness the writings of Mr. and Mrs. Hall, a century ago. In many old books- like Archibald McSparren's curious novel, MacDonnell and the Norman De Burgos (1829), which so many of us read in boyhood- there is plentiful evidence that Ulster's air once was as full of romantic appeal as the air of Connacht and Munster. This must be stressed; for the casual traveller of to-day gets a far different impression from what he sees as he treads the grey city of Belfast, or speeds along the concrete highways of the Six lost Counties. To-day, if you lack a guide, and leisure to follow him into the hidden unspoiled places, you will think that " Ulster," as its rulers presume to call the part-province, is an overflow of industrial Lancashire and Greater Glasgow to the Irish shore. For two decades, that region has been governed by company directors, who leave their boardrooms for nothing more gracious than the drum-beating meetings of the Grand Black Preceptory. They have worked their will, uncurbed by Irish patriotism or English liberality ; they have impressed their grim, joyless, unlettered, metallic nature on the fair kingdom of the O'Neills, the Maguires, the Magennises,
And now the stranger's sons enjoy The lovely woods of Clandeboye! 
Yet, the smoke of their money-making cannot cloud all the solitudes of Mourne and Iveagh ; their drums cannot forever torment the air of the glens, where the kindred of MacDonnell sleep above the blue wave. I will find you places and times, wherein you will acknowledge in the North-East the same incomparable Irish charm as in the free and well-governed parts of our island. Then you will realise how great a part of the varied heritage of our nation is withheld and abused and imperilled-but not forever. 
§ 2-Saint Patrick's Country 
Saint Patrick, when he returned to the land of his captivity as Christ's ambassador, landed in Lecale. That is the most easterly part of Ireland, where County Down looks across the sea to the Isle of Man. Between Portaferry and Strangford, a little channel is full all day of rushing water; for Strangford Lough, a hundred square miles in extent, is emptied and refilled with every tide, by roaring and foaming millions of tons of sea. It needs a daring navigator, in modern craft, to venture from the Irish Sea into this turbulent channel, and to sail in on the torrent like a surf-rider. Yet that is what Bishop Patrick's Gallic boat did, bringing the apostle between green and wooded shores to where, in swirling eddies, the tide widens into the island-studded lough. He came ashore at Saul, where a gigantic mitred figure in granite stands to commemorate him, on the top of Slieve Patrick. The spirit of Patrick seems all about you in that quiet country of little farms, Lecale. Here the apostle spent his last years, in retirement, writing his Confession Before Death, thinking of his friends oversea whom he longed to see again, yet could not, because he wished to remain with his spiritual children in their dangers, to the end ; and communing, in mystical sublimity, with God. " Behold now," he writes, " I commend my soul to my most faithful God, whose ambassador I am in my lowliness . . . . . . I pray those who believe and fear God, whosoever among them shall deign to look upon or receive this writing which Patrick the sinner and the ignorant wrote in Ireland, that never shall it be said that any little thing I have done or demonstrated by God's pleasure was done out of my poor merit ; but judge ye, and let it be believed, that it was donum Dei, God's own gift." Humbly exultant, conscious of a mighty work done through him, is the old Bishop, as he pens his message in Lecale, at the gates of Heaven. Never tell any man or woman of Lecale, or of Ulster, or any reader of that wondrous Confession, that Patrick was less than the apostle of Ireland, all Ireland. If there were anything considerable in the recent theory that the South of Ireland was Christian before Patrick came, and that his mission was only to the rugged North, it would be hard to explain that landing in Lecale ; for why should a missionary brave such difficult waters to find a landfall when he might come ashore easily in a Christian land to the south, and travel to Ulster by road? No, he who studies the country where every townland has memory of Patrick, and almost the people trace his footprints in the loughside paths, must be convinced that Patrick came to Ulster as to familiar country, the part of Ireland that he knew, since his days of captivity, the part where the work must be begun. Saul is named after the barn-church where the first Masses of the mission were celebrated. It is lucky that this corner of Down is not attractive to the great land-plunderers, and has nothing to attract manufacturers ; for so it has been left to the old race, whose indomitable strength can wring a living and happiness from little farms amid the hills. The fine-lined, high-bred features of the country folk here proclaim them the sons whom the old Bishop loved, the ancient race. That the boy Patricius spent his chief years of servitude on the hill of Slemish, farther northward, in Antrim is a belief rooted in tradition, but not confirmed by  
documents ; some scholars doubt its truth. We of the North, who have crossed mountains to behold that strange, mist-wrapped dome in the Braid valley, or have viewed it often, afar off, across the inland sea of Lough Neagh, we would find it hard to relinquish what we were taught always, that this, this is the place where Patrick herded swine and spent the nights under the stars alone, rapt in Divine contemplation. 
§ 3- Primacy
However the truth of that may be, there is no doubt at all about the place that Armagh, farther inland, in the orchard country, held in Patrick's heart. It was the headquarters of his life work ; there he enshrined the Papal gift of relics, there-by ancient testimony- he wished to be buried. 
Doroega port neiseirgi 
I have chosen as my place of resurrection, Armagh my church . . . . It is Armagh that I love, Beloved town, beloved hill, A stronghold that my soul haunteth. 
Who that loves some place where he has spent the happy years of his life can fail to recognise here the magnetic longing, which makes a man wish to leave his dust in the land that he loved ? Armagh, the Primatial See of All Ireland, is not under the rule of the Government of Ireland. It is severed from the free land ; yet, like Lecale, it is happy in being one of the places that smoke and noise have not polluted. The money-worshippers do not care much for the charms of a cathedral city, so this pleasant, dignified, storied country town is left to the traffic of the farms, and the works of learning and prayer. True, the drummers, when the spirit of Voodoo rises in them at the hot season, gather to beat their tom-toms outside convent walls, to disturb the sacred peace within ; and it is true, too, that the Papal Legate, when he travelled hither to visit the Cardinal Primate in the Eucharistic year, must enter Armagh by a circuitous road, lest an Orange mob molest the messenger of the Vicar of Christ. One remembers a spot on the road through the orchardland, where a loanin (as we call a boithrin) abutted on the highway ; and there a little group of poor folk had assembled, with a piece of blue rag raised on a stick broken from the hedge, as the best sign of their Faith that they could muster, and there they knelt and waited to bespeak the blessing of immortal Rome as the cars sped by-sped towards St Patrick's city. It is recorded that Patrick, when his strength was failing, set out for Armagh, on the wintry Ulster way; but his strength failed him, perhaps somewhere near Dromore, and he knew that he was not to reach Armagh, or to lie there. " It is servitude to the end," he said, in sorry resignation, and he died in Lecale. How sadly typical is what followed. The Ulidians of Down, and the Gaels who had driven the Ulidians from Emania a century earlier- these rival races contended for possession of the Apostle's body, so that the clergy of Saul or Downpatrick were fain to give it a secret burial, to avert the scandal of blows. Another century passed before the clerical secret could be revealed safely, and then it was made known that Patrick lay in the place that bears his name to-day, Downpatrick. Vast ramparts there recall the older, lost, epic lords of the Red Branch, who had been mighty here in the ancient times. 
§ 4- Mountains of Mourne 
The mountains of Mourne, which majestically give background to the events of Northern history- mountains that shew their beauty as far as Armagh and Belfast ; nay, but are cloud-like and lovely to the eye of beholders on the Hill of Howth outside Dublin-these noble Ulster highlands seem never to have found their rightful place in story. Their beauty is comparable to that of the mountains of Kerry. Go to Bryansford, where unfriendly lords have closed in the mountain demesne with a wall fifty miles long, and have cultivated rich forests : there you may see such a Highland picture as painters dream of; or cross the mountains by the road through the Deer's Meadow-there you may find high solitudes, among snow-Gaps, where unutterable peace lingers. A bare century ago, the " booleying" which Spenser described in Munster continued in the Deer's Meadow, in the heart of Mourne, when folk from the rich lowland country gathered here in summer, and dwelt with their mountain cattle, making huts of sods or wattles for their shelter. Woods and glittering cascades, rivers rich in fish, vistas that end in blue water far below ; soaring, wind-carved crags, high bogs arid pastures, game in plenty, -all that makes highland country wonderland is here. Dr. Lloyd Praeger, that learned wizard, has explored every height, every cleft and cranny, and has recorded all that science can gleam, of the rocks, the mosses, the flowers and the birds and beasts. Yet there is a want. Often and often that want has troubled me, especially when I have halted at what I think is the loveliest place in Mourne, and one of the loveliest in Ireland : I mean, at gates of St. Louis of Kilkeel, where a house of learning is set beside a mighty rath, the home of some forgotten lord who knew a perfect site. There the eye travels up a many-coloured valley to greet Donard and the gapped mountain of Bearnagh (Bearnach), all clothed in autumn in 
masses of gold and crimson and purple, an opulent harmony. This was Magennis country, the kingdom of one of the great clans. It is as beautiful, is it not, as the highlands that O'Donnell ruled, or the country of MacDonald over the water: and yet, where are its princely stories, its epic tales, its Gaelic lore ? As there were strong men before Agamemnon, but they are forgotten for want of the consecrated bard ; so, perhaps, Mourne and Iveagh had their splendours, in MacCartan and Magennis's halls-in that New Castle under Donard, and in Caislean Ruaidhri that we call Rostrevor, and stately Dromantine- but these have faded from memory, through the break of the literary tradition. Eighty odd years ago, one of my own family tried to write of Iveagh in Scott's spacious manner, and sang of bards and ladies of that land, and rumour that 
Flew as none had flown before! It flew through windows close and high, It flew from Lecale to Clanrye, From Connor's Wood to Lecale's shore : 
but though he trod all those mountain and moors and wove their lovely names into music, it is all too plain that he was imitating Scott without Scott's advantages of living records. The people of Mourne and Iveagh, harried by war and torn from their lands, remembered no longer the deeds of the Sons of Angus, or their pride. Yet it was in one of the loveliest inland folds of that country, Clanvaraghan (its name a poem), that a friar in the refuge which the Penal days allowed, made that incomparable translation of the Imitation of Christ, which is known as Tóraigheacht ar lorg Chriosta : he was, it seems, a MacMullan, one of a clan ever noted for its priests and patriots. 
§ 5- Rapparee and martyr 
Scott himself perceived that unworked romance is rich as gold in North-East Ulster. He interested himself in the story of Redmond Count O'Hanlon, prince of Orior, and captain of rapparees, which someday will give a master a worthy theme. He planned to write the story himself, and wrote to an Ulster lady, asking her to gather for him all that was remembered in Down and Armagh, concerning that hero of legend. What a book was lost, when the wizard failed to proceed with his purpose ! If you would meet O'Hanlon's spirit, you might visit Iveagh House, the home of the late Heber Magenis, whose loss is fresh in all our hearts, at Aughataraghan, near Poyntzpass; for that long, low Ulster farmhouse has in it the stones of O'Hanlon's ancient home, and the colonnade of trees that leads to it is named O'Hanlon's Wood. It was at the place that we call Mountain House, up over Camlough, on the road rising to Belleek - there where the old coach road winds under whin-clad cliffs and hangs over falling fields away to the crooked loch - that O'Hanlon used to meet his men at the tavern. There is an inn there still, but it is more like a convent than an inn, so full of peace it is, in the care of gentle ladies; but how often we have halted in the long summer afternoons, when the cuckoo fluted in deep glens, or at night, when the stars seemed big in the mountain air and the limed walls were mysteriously blue,-there is a place as magical as the West. Some learned person, perhaps, when we talked there of O'Hanlon, and imagined him lurking here to waylay the coach, would tell us, what is true though few know it, that there were two Redmond O'Hanlons. One was the highwayman, fabled at so many a fireside. He it was, for example, who had a little tailor in 
his band, and the tailor boasted that he could hold up any coach single handed. O'Hanlon put him to the test, and watched from afar ; so behold you, the tailor stopped the coach somewhere yonder by Lislea (Terry O'Hanlon's parish), but the travellers laughed at him, and dragged him through the coach window and drove on. My bold O'Hanlon laughed and galloped by lonely paths-over Ummeracarn, maybe-to halt the coach again, further north. The travellers knew that they were facing the real desperado now, and handed out their gold and jewels humbly. " There's one thing more," says O'Hanlon. " What's that, sir ? " "Just hand me out my wee tailor." The highwayman O'Hanlon, however, was not the Count. That prince of Orior lived a generation earlier, and lived as rapparees should, holding the highland places, when all around was defeat. He was an outlaw, but not a robber. Legend has confounded him with the highwayman, and the respective deeds of the two no longer can be disentangled. One deed of the Count's (as he was called) is historical and splendid, and the right climax of the yet unwritten story : and that is his death, when he gave his life in County Down for the Faith. Out from Dromantine, a planter's agent had come to seek to bribe the outlaw, offering him land and a home and liberty- his own Aughataraghan back again- if only he would give testimony to strengthen the case against the Archbishop of Armagh, then a prisoner. Blessed Oliver had visited the rapparees in their mountain haunts. He had gone to plead with them to make their peace. Let O'Hanlon only say that he had gone to plot a French invasion, and then his enemies' case would be clinched, and the Primate would die. O'Hanlon would be free to walk Ulster by daylight, and to enter Newry town without dreading the day when his head would be spiked on its gate. The Count was an outlaw. He did not love the martyr's peace-making policy. There was bitterness enough in the land. The martyr's enemies, however, miscalculated. O'Hanlon indignantly refused to betray the great Archbishop, and they had to find other false testimony before they had their way with the Servant of God. First, however, they wreaked their wrath on the rapparee chief. Somewhere up yonder in Hilltown, above Newry they slew him, and he died for Blessed Oliver's sake while the martyr himself still was waiting his doom. A comrade came to the dying chief. " Cut off my head when I am dead," he said, " and carry it away, so that they shall not spike it,"-so the head of the Prince of Orior was laid in holy ground, instead of gratifying the Planter's eyes as the ravens pecked it bare. 
§ 6- Mitchel 
Hilltown looks across to that queer town of Rathfriland, which is set on the summit of a very steep hill, with nine religions in its small main street. That is the town where Wolfe Tone nearly suffered. No house would give him food; for it was known that this young Protestant lawyer had supped with Catholic Bishops a few days earlier. A mob even threatened his life. In that hate-stricken region, the darkness of the mind seems palpable to this day. It is one of the districts where you will get no greeting on the road. I never asked for a drink of water there, as I did once when half fainting on a country road near Belfast, one Sunday; but I would not be surprised to be refused it there, as on the rise to Cave Hill. A drink of water, to a wayfarer, on a Sunday ? Let him fare farther for Samaritans. 
Newry is a homely, pleasant town with more " crack " in its fireside gatherings than in any other place I know. Lloyd Praeger says that it is beautiful. It was once. The roads which twist through the old quarter have shop fronts with small-paned, curved bows, such as you see in pictures of old Georgian cities in the days when fashion was in crinolines and fine gentlemen carried amber canes; but these traces of old dignity are grubby and shuttered now, and the walls of former prosperity are crumbling so fast that inhabited places are dusty, as in tenement-land. As everyone knows, John Mitchel is the genius loci of the town. The Unitarian Minister still shows the signature, in the records, of the Rev. John Mitchel. " That was the great rebel's father, sir." A predecessor of the Rev. Mitchel was a Scot, who used to ride once a month over Killeavy moor, beside Ravensdale, the jewel of all that land, to preach in Gaelic to the craftsmen working at Ballymascanlon, where the Franciscan nuns now have their convent of Mount Oliver - The " great rebel " was reared in Dromolane, the wooded suburb of Newry on the Armagh side, then a place as gracious, I think, as Cranford in Mrs. Gaskell's book. The young fellow loved all that country with an understanding delight. He frequented Ravensdale, and roved the Flagstaff hill, above Fathom; so that when he wrote of Aodh and Shane O'Neill, he could portray the scene of their deeds familiarly. Fathom, where Shane the Proud feasted the Viceroy one Christmas, instead of venturing into the Viceroy's web, has remnants of the castle, hidden in a fold above Dromolane. These places lie beside " the legend-lighted vale" of Gleann Righe, now called Clanrye. Down's cornfields clothe one side, and woods the sunless Armagh bank, as far as Narrowwater, where broad Carlingford Lough begins, and Gaelic lingered to our own time. Here it was that Mitchel's ear was attuned to the old tongue, of which he wrote so dearly. Clonallon, Dallan's Meadow, rises above the boarding-houses of " the 'Point." It recalls the clerical poet whom St. Colmcille caused to be elected chief of the whole literary guild of Ireland ; and Dallan's elegy for the saint remains the most ancient monument of Gaelic letters. So near is the ancient to the modern, even in these days; so short a step from an esplanade takes us to antiquity. It seems calamitous that Mitchel's genius was used up so largely in fruitless controversies in a far land, and the blood of his gallant sons poured out, not for the cause of their nation, but in the American Civil War. Mitchel, one thinks, is the man who best of all could have led the North, best could have roused an understanding love for the past, and so won his own people, like his own daughter for Ireland and the elder Faith. He was strongly drawn, but did not take the final step, as one thinks he would have done had he lived his days at home. Exile was his doom, and the doom of many hopes. The rebel tradition in which he stood has many and many a proud name, from the romantic Betsy Gray who rode to the battlefield in green, to the Man From God-Knows-Where, the noble Russell, whose dust lies near that of Patrick in our soil. Among the separated ones, there were many who laboured for Ireland not less fruitfully in the ways of peace. Who does not think (with Yeats) of Sir Samuel Ferguson as the greatest Irish poet of the Bearla, or recognise in his generous, tender, lofty nature the highest qualities of patriotism ? He drew this region on a vast poetic canvas in his Congal, but he lies at the last in Antrim, above Lough Neagh, in the ancient grave-land of Donegore, that he revered more than Westminster Abbey : 
Yet hold not lightly home, nor yet The graves on Donegore forget. 
Would that his people heeded such lines, or his lamentation at Ballinderry in the spring! Bishop Reeves, too, though to be sure, like Russell, he was an adopted Southerner - he worked through this land in devoted Patrician research, and wrote his name in the Protestant church registers in Gaelic. 
§ 7- Helen's tower 
Whether these folk ever will cleave to the land that they have seized, one knows not ; it seems unlikely now, when they forget their own best, and care not for Reeves and Ferguson. Have you marked Helen's Tower, yonder in the north of the county, above the bay at Bangor, and looking across to the Antrim mountains ? This high, wind-swept monument, commemorates Lady Dufferin, who wrote the most poignant of our late songs, 
I'm sittin' on the stile, Mary, Where we sat side by side, 
and we hardly could grudge to such as she was, the broad lands of Clanaboy in which she dwelt. Was not the good Sheridan blood in her veins ? Yet the Hon. Mr. Harold Nicolson, who spent part of his youth in Clanaboy and writes of Helen's Town, recalls Scott's lines about the hearth of the O'Neills, and flippantly doubts whether the O'Neills ever had such a thing. Ah, where is there greater bitterness in Down's long story of humiliation, than this contempt of the new holders for the very memory of the old ? The history of the Clandeboye or Clanaboy O'Neills (Clann Aodha Buidhe, who divided from the Tyrone stem of the race six hundred years ago) is well-known, well-authenticated, amply recorded in Bardic verse, in charters and chronicles. Castlereagh, a pleasant spot that looks across to Belfast, and is seen in old paintings as a place of pastoral loveliness, was their capital ; its name was taken from them by the Stewart from Paisley who betrayed his own name and his country. Castlereagh, once a proud name, is a name long execrated ; but not for its true owners' sake. The Belfast trams go glittering on their way to Connswater and Dundonald, places now ugly enough, but commemorating in their names the olden rulers. Clandeboye, Clandeboye !- must we grieve most or rejoice, that those who have plundered you forget your past ? It is better forgotten-by them. We in those veins runs the blood of Audh Buidhe do not forget. 
§ 8- Ille Terrarum 
Of County Down, and the neighbouring territory one may say pretty safely that this is the most richly varied part of Ireland ; so that, if it lacks the ultimate splendour of the West and South and their uncorrupted romance, it has for an offset an intense and versatile interest. Where else are there so many cycles of history represented ? This region, more closely packed than any other save Sligo with tumuli, cromlechs, giant's circles, and other relics of pre-history, was populous and vital country from the beginning. We have seen in our discursive sketch the duns of Red Branch warriors, where Amergin wore the poet's cloak of swan feathers when Virgil was chapleted with laurel in Rome ; Slieve Gullion, where Fionn's hair whitened, and Carnavaddy where at least we pretend that mighty Bran lies in the chambered cairn
Faughart, where St. Brigid's cult is kept with her green crosses, and many a Patrician sacred place ; nor do we forget the later saint , the statesman St. Malachy, and St. Columbanus who probably made the first draft of his Rhineland boating song, Heia Viri, when he was reading his classics by the boating bay of Bangor ; Scenes of the deeds of the great clans, when Brian of the Battle of Down made the last bid of the high O'Neills for the Kingship, but perished at the hands of the Normans, who sent his head to London ; of the clans, down to the last fight of the Northern Eagles, before great Hugh was broken ; The Cromwellian war, the Williamite war, the war of '98, and the struggle of the Fourth Northern,- all these raged through this frontier land, ever disputed, ever coveted, and still claimed and refused. One turns in memory from all these crowded scenes, stormy or splendid, to recall quiet days at Sruhan, when the blackbirds, fluttering at the white walls, looked like black roses crushed on a fair bosom, and the Kerry cattle browsed happily on the Fenian camping-ground, or from Caraban, the homes of happy people extended among orchards, and some went up the Cadger's Pad to gaze over Mourne and the lough, far, far below. One wrought on Horace's Ille Terrarum and made verses for a friend, the prince of writers in that country, John Crawford, thus: 
Ille Terrarum 
Friend of my youth, we often planned together Journeys to Spain, to pray at Compostella, Or by the Rhineland, in the pineland seeking Secret Monsalvat. 
Now would I rather rest beside Clonallon, Where Congal's horsemen forded Clanrye water, And there grow old, of seas and wandering weary, Weary of warfare. 
Of all the world, that fold to us is dearer Than bannered cities; sweeter its heather honey; Brighter its beech-leaves, and its winter "berries Redder than ruby. 
God to our loughside gave a kindly Winter And early Spring that dawns above Slieve Martin, Where farmers, gathering golden oaten harvest Envy no Meathmen. 
To you, to me, those blessed hills appealing Bid us abide the lengthening light of evening, Till you, when all our thousand cracks are ended Whisper : God rest him !
