TALE OF OUR LOST ONE
I have endeavoured to epitomise our Island's wistful story in the following poem. The reader will not fail to recognise
respectively, as they appear, the Danish, Norman, Tudor, Cromwellian .and Williamite periods.
Night
Wakeful I watched: it was the night, and I
these care-contracted brows weighed in mine hand :
wide sway held sleep in Eirinn ; not a sound
except it be that sombre Memory
(bird of a raucous throat, on dripping wing
dipped now and then into the brackish wave,
which round this heart's rent coast continual beats !)
her melancholy cry responsive sent
Tale of Our Lost One !-to where Echo sits
. sad sobbing in her caves. Was it a dream?
The sickle moon the hand of midnight thrust
into the azure field (its convex rim,
dear-cut and smooth, but on the inner edge,
like beads of dew, the calcined craters showed),
when, lo ! bright-glittering in the beam an host
of men in armour moved. Grim concourse this, 
whose foremost serried order kept not : fierce~
as the wild ages, or the boisterous wind,
or as the giant wave herself which once,
upon the breast, their dragon-headed craft
had borne from land to land. Fell pirate bands
, from the wild welter of the Northern Sea.
These roving hordes by several chiefs were led,
upon whose brows were casques with iron wings,
which, lifted up, appeared prepared to strike
the air in passage : and instead of greaves,
uncouth, around their knotty legs were tied
thongs of tough bull-hide : on their necks, like manes
of lions, fell a mat of tawny hair.
These under shadow forward fared. What first
appeared a cloud, that shadow on them cast,
viewed nearer, was a raven flapping wings
as vast as mountains, and, like mountains which
retain the import of the torrents, made
an echoing through the haunted solitude.
So like an echo these were sped.
To them
ensued a motley crowd : some recently
their mortal loathsome lives had left, and some
of old anterior time : of high, of low
degree were there, but each alike did wear
upon the brow the brand of treachery.
Their King, a princeling : known to infamy
the name of Leinster's lord-MacMurrough ! He
veiled his false visage foul : unto him clung
a woman beautiful, her streaming hair
like gold above a pearl-pale brow was spread.
Next came a troop of mounted chivalry, ·
each man complete in steel : the horses neighed ;
curving they paused and proud, while the white foam
such as is churned in the enraged sea,
went whirling through the files ; the men-at-arms,
their pennant's streaming in the night wind's breath,
their quarterings flashing and their wavering plumes
each visor adumbrated, till at a sign
each visor up was flung, displaying to view
ten thousand masks of seemed and fissured bone,
whose dark, lack-lustre orbs cavernous peered
most mournful in mine own, making the plumes,
wide-swinging o'er those crested helmets, as
are cypress trees o' ershadowing sepulchres.
Fierce Cambrian spirits these, inured to war,
the Captain of this band a massive bow, 
(built from a yew-tree of a thousand years,
such that no hand but one alone might bend,
and thence to haughty Strongbow sprung the name ! )
across his shoulder huge, ostensive bore :
but o'er his saddle-crupper, chained thereto,
through midriff hewn, a stripling's corpse was flung,
the red intestines and the lower limbs
on one side hung dangling ; on the other side
the trunk, head downward, and its girlish face,
white as the chalky moon and rimmed with curls.
The vanguard these, whose arms and trappings marked
an age remote.
More recent those appeared
who followed after : more refined they seemed :
their garb more gorgeous ; ruffs and silk brocade
instead of glinting harness : harder they
at heart than tempered steel, the Damascene
from forges old supplied. Leading these on,
"exceeding lean and in the light of fire,"
a female spectre on a palfrey paced,
wearing a crown, but on one shrivelled hand
dark stain was seen, which ceaselessly she sought
with sigh to rub away, but not attained.
Elizabeth this sceptred spectre's name:
by might and not by right her title, Tudor !
The o'ergorged scald-crow and the grey wolf owned
her sovereign headship in a lonely land.
Thereafter followed regiments of dead,
the troopers booted to the thigh, while each
wore the steel morion ; in the left hand some
a book supported, while the right hand grasped
the naked two-edged sword. Upon the march
these same did seem to chaunt, but only seemed.
Nor sound made they of foot or tongue ; alike
mutely they moved : more audible the breeze
along the reed-beds hissing than those drums,
or brasses blown of shadowy trumpeters.
I doubt if louder flaps her cloudy wing
the· startled heron, lifting her unreal
and languid. body from her pasturage.
High towering above these, as it were in bronze,
cast by some sculptor, seeming to direct
his mail-dad soldiers, Cromwell walked the night;
a waft of death from off his icy cheek
blew piercing and chill.
Beneath the westering moon
the tenebrous array majestic moved,
lurid and direful. Straight I heard a voice
far off, across the plain (I heard it twice!)
sing shrilly : scarcely audible its cry - imperative to ghosts. Their warning took
those fierce, pale spirits, and a blast of wind
(or of faerie was it ?) wheeled them in one cloud
promiscuous, that drifted casually,
the tender and all-fragrant meadow stalks,
shaking the skirts of that fell mist from off
their guileless brows !
Morning
'Twas dawn. More was to come,
yet such a cavalcade as never more
o'er this old earth shall move, on which there lights
the dark original and fatal curse,
that makes us what we are. High in the air
where still one shining planet, cherub son
of Light, had lingered late, his winking head
nodding the while he dozed, now steadily
bright farewell glance and clear around him bends,
preparing to depart into the skies.
There mid-way up the lucid interval,
above the beauteous star, a troop of souls !
Unlike the martial ghouls, they spake, they sang
as brother unto brother. In converse,
vocal and instrumental, were engaged
their heavenly kindreds, and surpassing great
their numbers, and their glassy essences :-
not whiter the flashing cascades of the sea,
than their bright dazzling raiment, "Justice" called,
which not concealed and yet admitted much
that had glorified their earlier character,
These all had died despised, some famine-struck ;
some wasted by fever or ill-usage; some
most manfully resisting, yet borne down
by duress foul ; their captive persons fall'n
under the clutches of an Ogre Law ;
'gainst them the strident ·judge inveighed in vain !
So thunder to the watery hemisphere,
the limpid and innoxious element
replies not, nor rejoinder deigns. Some there
had expired by piecemeal, from the gallows-tree
cut down still breathing, by the hangman's knife
embowelled and in writhing quarters hewn,
not suffered in their entirety to die ;
some of that choiring throng, the hound bad pulled 
to earth, and others, like rich tassels, tied
to common rope of twisted straw had gone
inconsequently up and down the wind :
of Francis and of Dominic faithful sons,
and priestly champion of Loyola taught
his discipline within the Camp of God.
Whose strength in weakness strongest trial proved - Saint Clara's quiet daughters, whom the limbs
of wrath had dragged to gibbets : these and more
sad hempen collar casting, wore instead
bright, lucid necklet : who so once had danced
in obscure jail on nothing, piteously,
to obscene song of jesting hangman, now
oared the azure aether with white vans.
The rack, the fiery pincers and the stake
stigma had left on agile limb, which now
all subtle, shining and impassible,
went forward glad to hymn ineffable.
Some there not signalised by wound or scar
inflicted by malice, to that choir were joined,
exultant now, who underneath the rod
of Tyranny, oppression's yoke had borne,
unmurmuring : attractive spirits these !
Excluded once from school of worldly lore,
derided by their captor for the lack of what
that self-same captor had to them denied.
That prison-house of menial Ignorance,
(to whose low roof those souls erect once bowed,)
to prison-breach unpunished now must own;
empty of its poor victim every cell
where Slattern and Degraded Poverty,
(child of that self-same House of Ignorance
and Janitress thereto,) used to fling down
before the inmate such unwholesome food
as water from the putrid well and roots
(with blight toad-spotted!) infamous reproach
"to savour such foul fare (as salt) supplied.
Flawless those brows were now, and radiant
as is the sun, which shineth in his strength ;
a steadfast peace expressed those cloudless eyes.
At which, being mortal, I did swoon away - a deep, a rapturous swoon-and when I awoke
instead, where Heaven's blest luminousness had been
the common lower orb of day resumed 
his harsher tenor, while I who had wept 
in bitterness o' ernight, sweet tears let fall,
the secret of His Secure Providence admiring.

