The Galway Dominican Fathers are justly proud of having the city's most popular shrine. In their church on the Claddagh, St. Mary's of the Hill, devotion to the Rosary goes back three hundred years and centres round a carved wooden statue of Our Lady which is nearly as old. Against a modern mosaic setting of brown fishing sails on a crystal blue sea, of kneeling Claddagh figures and guardian patron saints - Nicholas and Enda -the carved Madonna stands in startling contrast. Her mild expression and classic features resemble a Maratti painting. Her animated form, her breeze-blown draperies, the curling clouds and angels' heads that cling about her feet suggest that she has alighted from another sphere, forbidden to the senses and upon whose threshold imagination halts. By his mastery over wood the artist has disguised the stubborn medium and subtly conveyed, in the Madonna of his creation, an illusion of suddenly arrested flight. The Holy Child sits upright on her arm looking out over the world, His right hand raised in blessing the Rosary which she offers with spontaneous gesture. But this spontaneous gesture only partly justifies her floating draperies, her air of movement completed. Further explanation must be sought for in the canons of Italian Baroque art. According to these laws the sculptor concerned with the dispersion of volume made use of light and varied folds to mitigate the bulky impression of his statue. He also achieved his aim of energy released by -creating the illusion of movement. Thus our Madonna's pictorial drapery and wafted head-veil dissolve the weight of the wood and create this required impression of completed movement. Light and shade 'Playing upon the contrasting folds and richly varied lines of robe and mantle give her lightness and grace and withdraw nothing from her dignity. A side-view accents her classical features and the grace of the folds relieves the heavy mass of the form. "Beauty must be seen where the artist has chosen to put it," said Delacroix. Therefore this gracious Madonna, evoking Mediterranean life and sunshine, would I think, be best seen because best understood, in a Baroque setting, such as was first designed by Bernini or Vignola, where sky-borne figures frescoed on vault and dome appear to transcend space, where collumns, piers and pilasters break up the walls 
and suggest receding distance; where every trick of light from above increases the illusory impression of architectural forms and creates within limits, the sensation of immeasurable pace. The glorious art style first fostered in seventeenth-century Rome was not the outcome of perverted taste as the Encyclopaedists led men to believe when they nicknamed it Baroque from a term in logic-suggesting turgidity in art. It was a natural growth from the elegant simplicity of the Renaissance. It was an artistic progression in architecture, painting and sculpture striving with new problems, creating new and incredible effects with light, space, mass. Like every other art style it followed a curve from the upward tentative stage through the phase of complete freedom to the decline preoccupied with decorative detail. Those hostile to the style eagerly seized upon the last phase in order to decry the whole. Neither did Baroque derive, as has been claimed, from so-called "Jesuitical principles." Religious art cannot be isolated from the general artistic current of an age without becoming dead. Rather, it must at all times "assume, the while exalting them from within, every means and every form of technical vitality placed at its disposal by the contemporary generation." This is what happened in seventeenth-century Rome. Nearly a hundred years earlier St. Ignatius, as a great leader of the Counter Reformation who had brushed elbows with Calvin at the College Ste. Barbe, who had tramped Paris while Rabelais exerted great influence there, realised that Christianised art and learning were vital not only to adorn but to defend the Church against reformers, iconoclasts and pagan humanists. In the same way as he took the heathen classics from the neopagans and turned them into instruments of Catholic education, he sought to employ every talent, music, drama, art, in the service of God. It was only when his design of having Michelangelo build the Gesu came to nothing that Vignola, twelve years later, was called upon instead and the first Baroque church was thus erected. 
It was by capturing and marshalling intellectual Catholicism that the Jesuits of the seventeenth century led the vanguard of the Counter Reformation. It was by seeking the co-operation of the finest artists of the period and by fostering the dramatic quality of their work that the Jesuits with the great families of Barberini, Pamphili and Chigi, from whom so many princes of the Church were drawn, brought upon this art expression the bitter hostility of the Church's enemies. When Pope Urban VIII made Bernini his arbiter artium and commissioned Pietro da Cortona to fresco the Palazzo Barberini, when his successors to the throne of Peter continued to patronise the building and decoration of churches and palaces, they affirmed with artistic splendour the truths which heretics and iconoclasts had denied, while the sculptors, painters and architects, given the unique opportunity of exploiting the riches of marble, enamel and gold, were enabled to realise their artistic conceptions, exalted by the triumph of the Faith, on a scale never before so vast or so generously allowed by art patrons. In Counter Reformation art the graphic representation of dogma and divine truth - especially those truths denied by the Reformation - became of first importance. Protestants had shown particular hostility to Our Lady by destroying her images. The Church replied by encouraging devotion 'to the Immaculate Conception. As the Irish theologian Luke Wadding did in his writings, so Murillo and Montanes in their art set themselves to celebrate the cult. Their masterpieces of painting and sculpture still continue to inspire the fervour of the faithful and to stir the attention of unbelievers to Our Lady's place in the Church. The Blessed Virgin, attacked by heretics, became the special protector and defender against heresy, and the revival of devotion to the Rosary gave new impulse especially to Dominican art-always transcendental in character. In their churches on the Continent the public were sure to find some work inspired by the Rosary, perhaps a painting of Our Lady offering the beads to St. Dominic, a stucco relief depicting her vigil over the battle-torn ships at Lepanto or a statue in wood or stone representing the Madonna and Child clasping the rosary beads. So, today, in the Galway Dominican church, we find a seventeenth-century Italian Madonna of the Rosary, the most treasured possession of the Fathers and the people. They value it, not as a work of art, but because of the belief it represents, because its history has been so closely linked with their own penal sufferings that they have come to look upon this statue as the symbol of Our Lady's special protection over Galway. The Madonna holds in her right hand a large mother-of-pearl rosary, the recent gift of a Claddagh seaman to replace the original seventeenth-century beads. On her head she wears a modern silver-gilt crown presented by a Galway lady in 1922. But the Dominicans have another crown locked up in an iron safe in the sacristy because they believe it to be the original. This treasured crown of silver with floral and geometric design boldly carried out in the pierced, repousee work of the seventeenth-century just fits the Madonna's head. Unfortunately there are no assay marks on the silver. Neither have the honey-suckle patterned panels, each with a central boss, any distinctive feature to suggest Galway workmanship, but the four-pointed geometric design engraved on the dividing bands and base is very similar to that often found on the knobs of Galway chalices of the same period. An inscription clearly engraved on the eight bosses establishes the date and identifies the donor. The inscription reads: "Pray for the souls of John Kirwan and Mary his wife 1683." On a close investigation of the local history of this period we find that this John Kirwan must have been the Galway Mayor of l686; famous because he was the first Catholic to hold that office for thirty years. 
John Kirwan's Crown 
The years immediately preceding 1683 marked the turn of a phase in Galway's history. Since 1652 when, after nine months siege, hunger had -compelled the citizens to open their gates to the Puritan conquerors, when the terms of the honourable capitulation had been violated and the era of Cromwellian "frightfulness" begun, the economic collapse, the material decay of the wealthy and beautiful city had been only a question of time. The nobility, then natural leaders of the people, had sought refuge from persecution and relief from the overwhelming burden of taxation by taking sail from Galway Bay. Many of the clergy, shipped to the island rocks of Aran and Inisbofin, were existing in starvation, their churches stabled horses, their books were destroyed and chalices used as drinking cups by Puritan soldiers. Even the monuments of the dead had been desecrated. In his report to Government Sir Charles Coote boasted of having "cleared the town" of Catholics. Thousands had been transported to the Barbadoes as slaves. The plague had taken toll of the rest. The old waterfront, once splashed with foreign merchantmen, crammed with rich goods of exchange, noisy with industry and the concourse of men, lay silent and empty. Trade was dead. Grass grew between the cobbles of the spacious streets. The chiselled mansions of the merchant princes were, through ill usage, falling stone by stone. When by 1678 the affairs of the city had reached their lowest ebb the (Protestant) Corporation of that year finally awakened to the seriousness of the situation, and in the belated hope of improving matters decided to permit the return of some of the old Catholic families who during their exile had made good. Many of the heirs of the Galway merchants returned from Athenry and the wild outlying regions, to find the rabble soldiery of Bristol quartered in their former homes and, amongst them, most likely, came John Kirwan. We can almost see him approach the gates of his native city after years of absence as would a stranger, a long-haired, high-hatted, wide-cloaked figure, frowned on as an "enemie alien" by the Cromwellian sentry on the battlements. With his great fortune amassed in the West Indian trade, which alone would have entitled his return, John Kirwan brought his business experience, his personal integrity, and a heart devoted to  
the service of the people. In this he but carried on the tradition of his family, for since the sixteenth century the Kirwans had taken a prominent part in the public life of Galway. By the end of a few years he had done much to revive the wool trade, foster horse and cattle breeding and improve the houses by introducing glass windows. From a Cromwellian soldier he took over the native estate of Castlehackett and bought out the Corporation lands granted in 1673 to Elizabeth Hamilton, widow of a Charles II favourite. In 1686 his election as the first Catholic Mayor of Galway for thirty years was made possible by the accession of James II. To the persecuted and impoverished clergy with their cottage chapels and pewter chalices he was a benefactor. In 1683 he and his wife, Mary Kirwan, presented the Dominican Fathers with the silver crown for the statue of Our Lady in their chapel on the Claddagh outside the city walls. Perhaps they gave the statue also, or maybe one of the Dominican Fathers had brought it with him on his homeward journey from Naples or Rome with the purpose of spreading devotion to the Rosary. We only know that the statue first became a centre of devotion in the small stone chapel which replaced the old cruciform abbey, whose square grey tower for two hundred years had stood out against the skyline, a welcome guide to vessels sailing up the estuary. Unfortunately, the ravages of time and modern restoration have removed any evidence of pin holes on the Madonna's head such as might have coincided with the two vertical pin-slots fixed on the inside of the crown. So we lack a technical proof that our statue is the actual statue for which the crown was made. But both crown and statue belong to the same period-the second half of the seventeenth century. The crown just fits the Madonna, which is a half-size figure, and therefore we may assume that it was made for the statue. 

The Rosary
We do not know whether John Kirwan presented the crown in petition or in thanksgiving for a favour, or to commemorate some special ceremony in the Claddagh chapel, perhaps the setting up of the statue to revive a devotion already established much earlier. But we do know from tradition as well as from the names of Galway Dominicans, each especially preserved in the brief Penal Records as a "great promoter of the Rosary" -when that apostolate entailed the risk of life, that a confraternity had been established early in the century and that throughout the following years the Claddagh church was a celebrated centre of the Rosary. In their sermons the Dominicans exhorted the people to ask God's help for temporal and spiritual needs through Our Lady and, in her honour, to say the Hail Mary-the Angel Gabriel's greeting-after the Pater Noster. With mediaeval chivalry they offered the new form of prayer as a symbolic garland of roses to the Queen of Heaven. In 1474 one of the first confraternities of the Rosary was founded at Cologne and its members were granted special indulgences. Shortly after Don John's dramatic rout of the Turkish fleet, acknowledged by Pope Pius V as a direct answer to the public prayers of the Roman confraternity, the new feast was first allowed in all churches where an altar was dedicated to the Holy Rosary. In the seventeenth century the Church once more urged the people to have recourse to Our Lady's intercession as a counter attack to the Reformation. The Rosary then spread throughout most European countries but naturally became most popular in Spain where the tradition went back to the days of St. Dominic. Through Spanish-trained Dominicans the Rosary reached Ireland. There, the opening years of the century had seen the older members of the Order scattered, bewildered, intimidated by the grim novelty of persecution; unable to preach much or receive novices to refill their depleted ranks. The survival of the Faith seemed precarious. Hope for the continuity of the Order was almost dead when the first groups of Spanish-trained Dominicans arrived. These young men, sent out by a far-seeing Provincial, Father O'Duane, to the colleges of Lisbon, Salamanca and Seville returned with a thorough ecclesiastical education and in addition a zest for missionary work which an ardently Catholic country alone could inspire. In the fervent atmosphere of the Spanish schools they absorbed something of St. Dominic's fire, of Teresa's mysticism and of Spanish chivalry for the Faith which inflamed their hearts with apostolic zeal, steeled their souls to future hardships and prepared them not only to be missionaries but to be martyrs. Equipped thus with learning and holiness they returned in small batches to Ireland. Avoiding the spy-infested port towns they landed secretly at quiet creeks and unfrequented spots along the coast. There they separated, each making his way to where he was assigned and from where, in the spring of the year, he would begin his itinerant mission. In busy streets, at fairs and market places the Dominicans, in disguise, mingled with the people. In remote villages and lonely mountain glens, where no spy cared to linger, they might be seen, preaching, teaching, expounding catechism to children, administering the Sacraments to souls deprived of them for years, infusing courage into timid hearts, leaving hope where they had found despair. They brought a new spirit into Ireland. They also brought the Rosary. The Blessed Virgin would not fail the penalised Irish in their hour of need. . "Gaude, Maria Virgo, quae cunctas haereses sola interemisti…” They preached in Irish and soon became known as Aithreacha an Phaidrin, the Fathers of the Rosary, because the Rosary was their special gift to the people into whose hearts they instilled a love for and habit of this prayer. Their children's children have never relinquished it. To it they owe much for their ardent faith today, stamping the Irish Catholic the world over. As the Dominicans brought the devotion to Ireland they also brought the first rosaries from Spain. These beautiful beads of glowing amber or bright coral were strung on a silk cord also passed through the tubular cross and secured at the ends by knotted fringes. Their type is, perhaps, known to us through the Rosary Madonnas of Murillo, Alonso Cano and-in our own National Gallery-of Sebastian De Llanos (1667) where the Virgin enthroned on clouds holds a rosary of bright coral complete with tasselled, tubular cross. Many Irish families, especially western families, still possess rosaries of a similar type -treasured heirlooms handed down from mother to daughter. It is difficult to say whether these as well as the similarly-designed but much more usual silver, hollow-beaded rosaries, whose tubular crucifix often has a Gothic Madonna on the back, were ever made in Ireland. Their numbers and uniform design suggest that they were made in the country - some by silversmiths, others by the people as they needed them. Dr. Costello of Tuam has recorded from an old Galway man, long since dead that "When the people wanted a new beads they would go down to the docks and buy coral or amber from the sailors to make them." Numbers of roughly-cut amber beads bear out this tradition. Incidentally, Irish Rosary rings of which the National Museum has many examples are characteristic of the Basque country where they are still worn by women on both sides of the Pyrenees. But while Baltic amber, Balearic coral, or even native-made rosary rings were not within the means of every one, the trees and stones of the countryside offered other ways of counting prayers. And so, even to-day, in remote parts where commercial beads are scarce some families still recite the evening Rosary on knotched sticks-the Paidrin Scóir-on rounded pebbles, dropped one by one in heaps of ten, on knotted twine and-picturesque reminder of their Spanish coral prototypes-on strings of scarlet rowanberry beads. 

The great exile 
For fifteen years the crowned Madonna stood in the thatched penal chapel outside the walls. Those who knelt beside her prayed for the future of the Faith, and for peace, with alternate hope and fear. The Catholic king who had sought their help, for whom they had risked estate and life, had failed and fled, 
leaving them to the fate he had brought about them. After the relief of Derry in 1689 and the loss of all Ulster to King William they had with foreboding watched the rapid advance of the Dutch General, Godert de Ginckel and his experienced troops. Ballymore, Athlone and Sligo had fallen in alarmingly quick succession. At Aughrim, where a superior position in the field had raised their hopes of victory, St. Ruth, in the hour of battle crisis, had lost his life and the day ended in disaster. Yet, Limerick had defeated the English army, led in person by the King, and the Galway citizens, strengthened in this knowledge had determined to defend their city to the last. They had made wholehearted preparation. They had cleared the walls, mounted the guns, levelled the cabins and hedges around the suburbs, thrown up strong works to defend the important East Gate and repaired the fortified works on the Hill. They had raised extra companies of foot. Balldearg O'Donnell from Iar Chonnacht had promised help in arms and men. French assistance was eagerly expected in the bay. Alas, instead of reinforcements, on the morning of July 19th, 1691, the watchers on the wall sighted the enemy hosts advancing south-east from Oranmore. The English column twisted like a scarlet thread over the plain. The Dutch line, compact and grey as the landscape, was, but for the glint of gun-carriage wheels, scarcely visible in its sinister, inevitable advance. When all was over the Galway citizens remembered having heard the first shots fired between the outposts and then the bad news that followed. The passes from Iar Chonnacht had been seized, the communication lines with O'Donnell severed and all possible help cut off. Later, on the same day, while they stood in anxious groups watching clouds of acrid, opaline smoke rise from the flaming suburbs near St. Dominic's church, listening to the dull cannonading from the walls, they first grasped the word passed breathlessly from mouth to mouth of Captain Bourke's treachery at the South East Fort . . . In the loss of that important citadel the anti-war element inside had found, sooner than they dared hope, the desired excuse fur surrender. During the stormy debates that followed, while armed troops were encircling the wall and Ginckel was hammering with increasing impatience at the Gate, French military opinion carried little weight. The councils of the selfish Corporation and the richer merchants prevailed. On the 24th of July the Articles of Galway were agreed to and signed. On the 26th the surrender took place. Those astir early that morning saw their Governor, Lord Dillon, lead the lightly-armed, poorly clad garrison of two thousand men through the gates and away to make a last stand at Limerick. Behind them Lieutenant General D'Ussone and Monsieur Metlett, Commissary of War, had passed with arms, "bagg and baggage" under safe conduct into the English camp. At noon the heavy chains clanked loose once more and the wooden gates swung open to admit the victorious General and his armed outriders. Fifteen thousand Irish soldiers left the country to win glory on the battlefields of Cremona Almanza and Fontenoy. Ireland was leaderless and undefended. The Treaty of Limerick bad been signed eight weeks when, in flagrant violation of its terms, Catholics throughout the country were disarmed, deprived of every civil and military office, forbidden to practise law or medicine. The enforcement of the Penal Code was under way. But William, deeply involved in the war with France, was still dependent on the goodwill of his Catholic allies, Charles II of Spain and Leopold I of Austria. He therefore found it wise to maintain a policy of partial toleration towards his Catholic subjects in Ireland. Despite the hostility of the Protestant minority who ruled the country, priests were permitted to say Mass in private and the people according to the caprice of the local authorities were allowed to carry out their duties unmolested. In Galway, many looking into the future saw the dawning prospect of a brighter day. They believed that the mediation earnestly sought of the Catholic kings, Charles and Leopold, would finally prevail over William; that they would soon regain religious freedom, soon see the oppressed priest walk freely in the public streets, and attend Mass openly celebrated with all formal propriety and splendour at the High Altar of a worthy church. Thus they lived and hoped from day to day and year to year, when suddenly, like a bombshell, burst about their ears the worst news for the Church they yet had heard, the banishment edicts of 1697. As long as the issue of William's war with King Louis had been doubtful and his throne remained unsteady, as long as the presence of trained and equipped Irish regiments on the continent kept open the possibility of an English invasion, the King and Government had avoided the danger of driving the Irish at home to desperation. Thus the contest had closed on terms of toleration. But the decline of France from 1694 onward, the fall of Namur a year later and the Peace signed at Ryswick village, near the Hague, released William from further obligation towards his Catholic allies. With the disbanding of many Irish regiments the fear of invasion passed. The King and court had no longer any reason to protect the Irish Catholics from the hatred of their Protestant minority government. On the 25th of September, 1697, a few days after the Peace of Ryswick had been signed, King William gave Royal assent to the three edicts passed earlier in the Irish House of Commons "for banishing all Papists exercising any ecclesiastical jurisdiction and all Regulars of the Popish clergy out of the Kingdom." These edicts aimed at the extinction of the Catholic religion as they forbade the exercise of all ecclesiastical offices essential to the existence of Catholic worship. No previous menace to Catholic life had been so serious. Under Elizabeth, most of the clergy, ignoring threats of imprisonment, eluding spies at every turn, had managed to defy banishment edicts not yet thoroughly planned or rigorously enforced. Even in the worst days of Cromwellian persecution the people had not lacked priests. Wherever Gaelic chief or Norman knight still held authority the "wanted" bishop or friar had been sure at least of a friendly roof. 
Now, for the first time in their history, the entire hierarchy and regular orders found themselves faced with the unexpected and overwhelming prospect of being compelled under pain of imprisonment or death to leave the country within a few months. There was no loophole left for escape. There was nothing for it but to comply. The Dominicans, like all the religious of Ireland, heard the news with consternation but they acted at once with resolute calm. In all their convents a breadth of vision informed their plans to meet not only the present enforced exile but also to cover the possibility of future return. That is, no doubt, why they were able, some years later, to pick up the broken threads of their rudely interrupted work. It is also the reason why, at a time when most church property was lost, the Dominicans on their return were able to recover some of their most valued treasures. Amongst these, the thirteenth-century ivory Madonna which the Fathers from the Youghal Convent entrusted, before going into exile, to a prominent Waterford Catholic, receives once more the veneration of the public. The historic Limerick statue, a Madonna of the Rosary, buried on the eve of flight, is restored to a place of honour. The now famous Kilcorban figures, through their wise disposal with the Bourkes of Pallas, remain as important witnesses to a mediaeval school of native wood carving in the West. By the 20th of March, 1698, and with six weeks still to go before the expiration of the final date allowed for departure the Galway community had settled their affairs and made their plans. Most of the members had found places aboard the Government warship whose brass guns trained on the convent wall shone, grimly from the shadow of the "Quai Bastion" where she lay berthed, waiting her final complement of grave silent passengers. In the convent, when all the bills and bonds had been settled, when all the heavier furniture had been disposed of and all the necessary packing finished, Prior Gregory Ffrench and Father Nicholas Blake, who refused to leave until the last duty had been fulfilled, turned with heavy beam to strip the little chapel which they had striven so hard to maintain with propriety throughout the worst days. They took the rich vestments from the shelves, the embroidered chasubles and copes, the silk dalmatics and antependiums and packed them carefully in a large chest. To these they added the processional canopy, the altar linen and the "severall smalle coatts for ye image of Jesus." They dismantled the altar and removed the altar-stone. They collected and packed the silver and gilt chalices, the ciborium and monstrance, the silver ampulae for the Holy Oils, the vellums, the singing books and the "two peir of beads." Finally, they lifted the carved Madonna statue from her niche, removed the crown, listed it as "the silver crown for the image of Our Blessed Lady" and added it to the rest of the plate. When they had packed and locked and deposited this chest into the custody of their brave and trusted friend, Valentine Browne, a Galway merchant, when he had signed and returned the -inventory of contents promising to keep them "to the best of his power, skill and caring and deliver them also at any time demanded" the Fathers turned once more to the statue to think out a plan for its safe keeping. Some say that they gave it into the custody of a Catholic family ; but the Dominican tradition holds that they buried the Madonna and a large bronze bell-also heavy and difficult to hide-in a secret place in the priory grounds. For the next one-and-a-half centuries there is very little record of the Galway Dominicans and no record of the hidden statue. We only know that in 1702, within four years of the exile, Father Ffrench was in prison on a charge of high treason "for returning from beyond the seas after being transported." Father Blake, who had accompanied him home, found himself left with the entire responsibility of the Dominican mission in Galway. In a poem forced out of his solitude he cries to the guardian angel :
" Solus ego vivo, solus tempora sumo 
Solus ego timeo, solus ad astra gemo . . . Alone I live, alone my days I spend ; 
The heavens receive my lone and fearsome sighs; "The lonely sparrow on the roof" am I Like to the lonesome dove of mate deprived. Sadly my plaint I make with heaving breast O guardian angel look upon thy charge And midst the heavenly chants my sigh regard. Take heart my soul and gaze upon the stars Whose placid light new hope should bring to thee. Here, if I bear with adverse fortune can I doubt That heavenly joys will be my reward. Let trouble bring new life to me, these Are but the prelude to the gates of bliss. 
Throughout the reigns of Anne and the first two Georges the fury of the Penal Code prevailed and Catholics were mercilessly hunted. Then the Scottish defeat at Culloden in 1745 had its repercussion in Ireland by a gradual decrease in persecution. After that disaster no fear remained of a rising in either country. In Galway the pressure had already eased some years earlier largely because of Mayor Walter Taylor's quiet refusal to implement the Government's anti-Catholic mandates. His lack of persecuting zeal is humorously shown by the contrasting evidence of his report to Government on the Penal Visitation of 1730 and a Dominican sidelight on the same visit. In his official report, for which he is voted the special thanks of the House for "his zeal in searching out popery" the mayor describes the Dominican chapel with its gallery, forms and defaced altar-piece. He enumerates the number of rooms in the convent, also the number of beds. "wherein, they believe the friars belonging to the said friary usually lay, but could find none of them.” In reference to this penal visit the Dominican account book enters an item "for claret to treat ye sheriffs in their search." By 1756 life for the Galway Catholics had become so much easier that the Dominicans lived once more a free community life. In 1800 they replaced the old thatched chapel by a better building on the same site. Most likely it was about this time and while they were furnishing the chapel that they recovered the statue. The first record of its presence comes from the recently discovered notebook of an old lay brother born in 1838. Therein Brother Alphonsus O'Donoghue mentions that the statue stood during his lifetime on a pedestal inside the priory door, where it remained battered, dingy and unheeded for nearly another century.' Those who had known the history of its arrival in Galway, its early associations with the propagation of the Rosary were long since dead and had not dared to leave any written account. To later generations, brought up in a period when true works of religious art were rarely executed, -the Madonna's lively grace and fluttering draperies must have seemed strange, especially when compared with the sentimental productions of commercial art hastily turned out of a mould and foisted on to a clergy creeping, as it were, out of the catacombs. In 1921 Father John Stephens became Prior of Galway. He noticed and admired the worn Madonna figure behind the Priory door. When, a little later he found and read Brother Alphonsus's notebook, which recorded the tradition of the burial, he decided to have the statue restored to its rightful place of honour. Acting on the advice of the late Father Hyacinth Jones he sent it to Cullen's, of Dominick Street, Dublin. There, beneath the dingy coat of Reformation whitewash an undercoat of white enamel was discovered and removed. The 22nd of May, 1922, was appointed for the public restoration of the statue. On that day it was carried through the old Claddagh village in a great procession formed by the clergy and people. In the church of St. Mary of the Hill the congregation prayed and sang while the Madonna was raised to her present place of honour in the specially prepared chapel on the Gospel side of the High Altar. 
What storms of controversy and persecution have raged around the Catholic practice of venerating statues of Our Blessed Lady and about her very dignity as the Mother of God. The Church fostered this pious practice because by presenting an image to the eye, it helped the simplest as well as the more learned to contemplate the mysteries of the Rosary. This statue has, as it were, shared with a persecuted people its sorrows and its messages of faith. Moulded by the ideas of the Counter Reformation it presented a human warmth and beauty in opposition to the bleak pride of Calvinism. Mounted for veneration amidst a people struggling against a horde of adventurers known as "Undertakers," whose only creed and policy was selfishness and spoliation this statue inspired fortitude and the joy of grace in the hour of darkness ; when the powers of that darkness prevailed this statue lay buried for generations. Now, our people, knowing its history, see it once again risen from the grave, giving them new hope and new courage to shoulder responsibilities laid upon them as the inheritors of such a wealth of generous traditions. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Burke, Rev. William P. Irish Priests in the Penal Times. Waterford, 1914. Coleman, Ambrose, O. P. The General Exile of 1698 . Irish Ecclesiastical Record, 4th series, 5, 1899. Fokker, T. H. Roman Baroque Art. Oxford Univ. Press, 1938. Gaffney, Fr. M : H., O.P. Our Lady of Galway. Pamphlet, 1937· Hardiman, James. History of Galway. Dublin, Folds and Sons, 1820. Lacordaire, Jean. Une Vie de Saint Dominique. Paris 1841. Male, Emile. L' Art Religieux apres le Concile de Trente. Paris 1908. O'Heyne, Fr. John. The Irish Dominicans of the 17th Century. Tempest Press, 1902. Ricci, Corrado. Baroque Architecture and Sculpture in Italy. Stuggart, 1926. Stephens, Fr. J. W., O.P. Original letter containing information on burial of statue. March, 1942. Story, G. W. Impartial History of the Wars of Ireland. Whitehall, 1691.
