The Gael is frequently chided for his refusal to co-operate with the historical process. It is ·said that he is so firmly chained by the past that he cannot escape into the future, and he is advised resolutely to cut the links of his own history so that he may harness himself to the band-waggon of Progress. Certain aspects of the life of James MacDonnell, who died in Belfast on 5th April, 1845, will serve as a case-history to test the accuracy of this diagnosis and prognosis. James MacDonnell was a direct descendant of Alexander MacDonnell of Islay who came to Antrim in the fifteenth century, and through him he traced his descent back to a long line of Gaelic princes, the kings of Argyll and the Isles. But he also looked forward into the new world of science which was unfolding during his lifetime. He graduated M.D. in Edinburgh; founded the Belfast Hospital where he instituted the first clinical course in medicine ever held in this country. He helped also to found most of the cultural societies which Belfast then possessed, some of which, the Linenhall Library, the Belfast Literary Society, the Natural History Museum, are still alive, while others, like the Irish Harp Society, have ceased to exist. These activities portray the transition from the old to the new and his life is a record of a constant effort at adaptation. The Gaelic world from which he sprang had staked its last throw on a Stuart prince exactly a century before his death. Its former leaders were in exile or had retained their possessions- by sacrificing their past. The new barons of the Industrial Revolution were not even aware of its poets still whimpering over its faded glories. In Ireland, a few aritiquarians, an occasional holder of a princely Irish name, a few 'aristocrats of two generations,' conducted the solemn obsequies of the Gaelic past now that it had been, as they believed, safely interred. None would have been more 
startled than they had it shown any sign of vitality. But for James MacDonnell it was not yet dead. He was born in 1762, in the Glens of Antrim, near Cushendall, second son of Michael Roe MacDonnell. Only two generations separated his father from the great Sir Alastair MacColla Kittagh who had fought at Montrose's side in the Highlands and had been killed in a skirmish at Knockanoss, Co. Cork, during the Cromwellian wars. A MacDonnell seanachie in the Glens gave the family pedigree: Michael Roe was the second son of Alexander, son of. Coll a Voulin, son of Sir Alastair, son of Colla Kittagh, son of Gillaspick who was present at the death of Shane O'Neill, son of Colla Maelduv of Kinnbann, son of Alexander of Islay. The following anecdote which was current in the Glens less than a century ago will illustrate how profoundly the whole feeling for life and sense of social values of the community there differed from those of the mercantile world outside. After the death of Alastair MacColl, his two sons, Gillespie Mor and Coll a Voulin, who had been under the protection of their kinsman, the Earl of Antrim, were turned out and sent to the Glens to board with a MacAuley who employed them as herds on Lubitavish. Their uncle, Lavderg MacAlister, going out to hunt; met the boys crying for a pig they had lost. Questioning them further he discovered his nephews. Much enraged with MacAuley it is said he would have killed him had he not kept out of his way. He took the two boys to Glenarm Castle where the Countess had much to do to quiet him before the return of Lord Antrim (whom he called méirleach and other terms of reproach); and the matter was settled that the boys should return to the castle and be brought up according to their rank. Such was the flamboyant Gaelic individualism of James MacDonnell's environment. His early education was in the popular school system of seventeenth century Ireland, the hedge school; his teacher, an outlawed Catholic; his companions, the sons of Catholic, Gaelic-speaking small farmers and fishermen. His son wrote, many years later, that his father and uncles went 'to learn what Horace calls the elementa prima in a school in one of the Red Bay caves taught by Maurice Traynor, a very remarkable man, unrivalled in all the country round as a teacher, who might in those days have been transported for teaching the three boys to read. He was a Roman Catholic . . .' We have no knowledge whether Maurice Traynor, like some schoolmasters of his time, had turned away from native culture to more utilitarian studies, or whether his educational edifice still rested on the twin pillars of Gaelic humanism, Classics and Irish. At all events, Irish must have been one of the vernaculars of his school for there were native Irish speakers in the Glens within living memory. But James MacDonnell had more opportunity than most for coming into contact with a great Irish tradition, for while he was still a boy his father engaged the famous harper, Art O'Neill, to teach him and his . brothers, Randal and Alexander, the harp. O'Neill was of the great Tyrone family and proud of his descent. Although blind from birth and without any private means he maintained the character of a gentleman harper. Carolan had been his immediate predecessor; he had been the intimate friend of Echlin O'Cathain. The great houses of the northern half of Ireland were open to him and among his patrons were Charles O'Conor of Belnagare, Toby Peyton of Lisduff, Mrs. Crofton of Longford, Con O'Donnell of Larkfield, Squire Jones of Moneyglass. He lived in the MacDonnell house for two years where he was treated with deference and had a personal servant assigned to him. He wrote that here 'the hospitality, disinterested friendship, and other favours and attentions shown to me . . . were not exceeded in all my peregrinations through this kingdom.' So, in his most susceptible years James MacDonnell came in contact with one of the last of the bards and had his emotions nurtured on Gaelic song and music while all around him Gaelic was still the living Speech of the people. In Ireland Gaelic culture was inextricably intertwined with the Catholic faith, and it is an eloquent commentary on the decay of religion at the time that although Michael Roe was a Catholic he allowed his Protestant wife to bring up her two sons in the Protestant faith. Like their kinsmen, the Earls of Antrim, founders of the Franciscan abbey of Bonamargy, this branch of the MacDonnell family had held on to the Faith through the years when persecution was fiercest, to lose it in a more tolerant age. Here, probably, was a deliberate turning away from the old to the new. In politics, too, there was a re-alignment of outlook among these descendants of Scottish kings. It is difficult for us to understand how much allegiance to the person of the sovereign had meant to these men. The king was their symbol, perhaps their only symbol, of nationhood. A Stuart had carried with him to the English throne the allegiance of his Scottish subjects. MacDonnells from Antrim had fought for a Stuart against Cromwell and against the Covenant. And while some MacDonnells had already bowed before the House of Hanover the death of Charles Edward in 1788 must have helped to ease their consciences. So far James MacDonnell's early education tended to strengthen the Gaelic side of his personality. His boyhood vision was of the past. Later schooling in Belfast and Edinburgh was directed towards the future. He attended David Manson's play-school in Belfast; a school remarkably modern in its outlook and methods. He also read Classics with a Mr. Garnett, presumably as part of his preparation for Edinburgh where he was to study medicine. His thesis for his doctorate On the Drowned discussed the various means then known for the resuscitation of drowned persons and suggested transfusion of blood as a remedy. (The suggestion was to be acted upon in tragic circumstances later in Belfast.) At Edinburgh he was in contact with the leading intellectual circle of the day. For almost half a century the ideas of the Scots and Ulster Scots philosophers, Francis Hutcheson, Adam Smith, David Hume, and Joseph Black, had been shaping public opinion not only in Scotland but also in England and Western Europe. The corrosive acid of their thought was eating away old-established beliefs, traditions and ways of life, making a vent for the explosive violence of the French Revolution. MacDonnell like other young Irish medical students in Edinburgh, William Drennan, Thomas Addis Emmet, could not help being influenced by the prevailing climate of opinion in the Scots capital so that he returned to Belfast full of radical theories. His trouble was that in spite of his scientific education he could not free himself from his Gaelic past. It coloured his outlook on religion, on politics, even on social and economic affairs. Like a modern Irish expatriate poet he might say I cannot be Anything else than what this land engenders me ••• I cannot deny my past to which my self is wed. He graduated at the age of twenty, set up in practice in Belfast in 1784, and married a Miss Eliza Clarke of that city. Mrs. McTier wrote to her brother, Dr. Drennan, in 1788, describing the town's new young doctor: "McD[onnell] is said to be sensible and modest, but these are not qualifications which generally gain the middling or lower sort of people. Smart impudent fellows who rail at their seniors and their systems oftenest succeed; this McD avoided." We may note in passing that this description of the douce young man does not agree with the portrait bust modelled in later life by Christopher Moore and now in the Belfast Museum: the last suggests rather the choleric and irascible clansman. The McTiers, the McCrackens, Samuel 
Neilson, Tom Russell, the half-pay officer for whom he obtained the librarianship of the Linenhall Library, these were his friends. In this circle such things as political reform and Catholic emancipation were openly discussed, and in secret some even whispered of armed revolution. But MacDonnell was no revolutionary. He moved in other circles too. The future Marchioness of Londonderry was not only his patient but a· friend, and, as her mother had been Countess of Antrim, in her own right, a kinswoman. But even apart from his aristocratic friends he was by birth and family tradition no democrat. Though like young Robert Stewart he helped to found the Northern Whig Club, though he watched with admiration the early stages of the French Revolution, he did not follow his more radical friends into the Society of United Irishmen. Wolfe Tone, who sometimes stayed at the doctor's house on his visits to Belfast could not understand him. He saw both sides of the doctor's character. He saw the modern-minded progressive young scientist who advocated reform and Catholic emancipation. He saw, too, the Gael, conservative, and in Tone's view, reactionary. These things were for Tone contradictory and MacDonnell appears in his Journal as 'The Hypocrite.' Writing to the historian Madden some forty years after Tone's death, MacDonnell says that while he had a regard for Tone he never reached intimate friendship with him. He continued: 
"I observed one trait of character which I did not approve of and which, perhaps, I could not properly understand; although the accredited secretary or agent of the Roman Catholic Committee, and going to London in that capacity with the delegates Keogh and McCormick (I think), I found him averse and afraid of the Roman Catholic leaders having any intercourse with Pitt and his friends, and he was only so far set upon emancipation as it fell in with his ideas of reform upon French principles, so that had the Government, as I wished, detached the Roman Catholics from the French principle of general or democratic reform by giving them the most practical toleration, I saw that Tone would have impeded that concession while he was paid as their clerk. I never would reconcile myself fully to this, and became hurt when I found that I had been so long acting in complete concert (as an emancipator) with people who wished for emancipation only as forming part and parcel of a greater design." 
It is probable that Tone and his friends were not consciously pursuing such a policy and it is even more probable. that the doctor did not so clearly discern the conflicting motives of the time as his letter would have us believe. But forty years had given him a better perspective and he now saw the aims of the contending parties more clearly than when he was at the centre of the turmoil. He was at some pains to justify himself to Madden on this point for he returns to the subject again:  
"I was exceedingly (from first to last) averse to the French connection and to democracy, and this ultimately produced a reserve on their part with respect to me, and the flame was about to burst out because . I became sure of their having negotiated with France ... I had a great intimacy and friendship with Archdeacon Sturrock who was principal preceptor of Lord Castlereagh, but at that period had no acquaintance with his lordship who resided then in Belfast. Sturrock told me that he asked, at the desire of his lordship, whether I thought any moderate reform would satisfy the people. I told him, most distinctly and conscientiously, that I was sure a very moderate and rational reform, with suitable regulation of the Popery laws, would instantly detach the most useful and efficient part of the United Irishmen from the wild republicans, and would prove an infallible cure for ill discontent, and that without something of this kind there would soon be rebellion. He left me, much struck with the strong manner in 
which I expressed this notion and the firm hold the opinion had of my mind. But on returning the same evening he then asked me -'What of the Church?' 'Oh,' said I, 'it is impossible to quiet the Dissenters who are undoubtedly the mainspring of the association without some modification of the tithes. This must be a sine qua non.' After this he did not return and never recurred again to the subject. This happened, I think, in 1796, perhaps about the end of the year." 
This attitude which placed emancipation before independence, was, in fact, that of the Catholic leaders, lay and clerical, at the time. Before condemning such views as unpatriotic we should realise that on their records the Northern Ireland parliament at Stormont might appeal with more justification for Catholic support than did the Irish Ascendancy when it found its privileges were threatened by the proposed parliamentary union with England. We must also allow for the clarification of the issues brought about by the lapse of over forty years. It is probable that Dr. MacDonnell did not at the time discern so clearly as he wished to have believed either his own views or the views and motives of Tone and his associates. Tone was in Belfast in July, 1792, to join his friends in celebrating the fall of the Bastille. · He looked in at the Irish Harp Festival in the' Exchange Rooms. Here MacDonnell had gathered together the most illustrious of the remaining harpers. His friend Edward Bunting was there; taking down the airs they played which were to be the nucleus of his famous collection; questioning old Denis O'Hampsey about his music and noting the Gaelic terms for the technicalities of harp-playing. O'Hampsey was almost a legendary figure. He was born in County Derry in 1695, had known Carolan and had played The king shall enjoy his own again for Prince Charles Edward at Edinburgh in' 45. He was, Bunting claimed, the last living exponent of the classical style of Irish harp-playing. Art O'Neill was there too, and in one of those incongruous contrasts typical of MacDonnell's life we find the doctor treating with an electrical machine the old harper's fingers which were crippled with rheumatism. This piece of modernity might have been the one thing about the festival that would have interested Tone who in his Journal dismisses the harpers and their music with a few patronizing words. It has been suggested that MacDonnell selected the date of the Festival so that it would provide him with an excuse for absenting himself from the Bastille celebrations. What ever truth may be in the story there is no doubt that the harpers and their music remained one of the great interests of his life. In 1808 he founded the Belfast Harp Society and under its auspices Art O'Neill taught the harp to seven or eight blind pupils. When the society collapsed in l8l3 through lack of funds he bestowed an annuity of £30 on O'Neill so that the old man was able to spend his few remaining years free from the harsher assaults of poverty. From 1792 to 1840 he continued to encourage Bunting to collect the traditional airs and to arrange for their publication. He employed an Irish scribe, Patrick Lynch of Loughinisland, Co. Down, to take down the words of the songs. On the publication of Bunting's third and 'last edition of his collection of Irish airs in 1840 the doctor wrote to him: 
"You say nothing of the spirit of patriotism and the actual utility in a natural point of view of keeping alive· all opinions, customs and innocent prejudices which bind mankind to their country wherever that may be, whether it be the Deserted Village or the mountain that leads them to the storm. These when early cherished act like instinctive impulses and carry with them a magic charm: they are delightful in prosperity, console us in adversity; they accompany us in the city or in the wilderness; when old we dote upon them." 
In the years between the First Harp Festival and 'the penning of that letter there were many occasions when the doctor needed consolation. It is significant that he found it in the traditional airs of his race. 
The first crisis due to his divided loyalties came as a direct result of the rebellion of 1798. Many of his friends took an active part in it and one, Henry Joy McCracken, was hanged. At this time as the methods employed by the hangman produced death by suffocation it was sometimes possible to revive a condemned man after sentence had been carried out. ln this case McCracken's friends removed the body as quickly as possible from the gallows and remembering MacDonnell's thesis On the Drowned sent for the doctor to resuscitate it. James MacDonnell did not come. He sent his brother, Alexander, also a physician, instead. The motives that prompted this evasion were neither simple nor obvious. MacDonnell never openly explained his conduct and it is significant that he continued to enjoy Mary McCracken's friendship, and she alone of the patriot's family fully shared her dead brother's political faith. The few facts that have been recorded make any elucidation of MacDonnell's motives largely a matter of guesswork. One aspect of his behaviour is, however, clear. It was essentially a compromise solution which enabled him to drift along to the next crisis. His friend Thomas Russell was intimate with Tone and the McCrackens. Tone refers to him frequently and with great affection in his Journal. Russell had also been a United Irishman and in 1803 he was in touch with Emmet and, in disguise; was organising the remnants of the United men in Co. Down. The government was soon aware of his activities and a reward was offered for his arrest to which James MacDonnell was induced to subscribe. Russell was arrested, convicted of treason and hanged. One of the principal witnesses against him was the scribe Lynch. Years later MacDonnell wrote to Madden: "In signing that paper, I did, what I then considered, and what I now consider, a solemn duty, but I had not done it an hour until I wished of all things, it was undone. I need not dwell upon what passed soon after, when. Patrick Lynch was apprehended and fixed upon to identify Russell, in which transaction Lynch was entirely blameless in my opinion." 

But public opinion reacted violently to this betrayal of friendship. MacDonnell's radical friends cut him. Mrs. McTier, Drennan's sister, called him 'a contemptible Judas,' and her acid pen etched the scene in a Belfast coffee house when the news became public: 'At the Coffee House a C. [church? Catholic?] priest was holding up the. example of Dr. Mc for sacrificing private friendship to public good, when John Hancock, [a Quaker] lifting his eye -from _the paper, said, "And would'st thee wish for such a friend?" ' We cannot take the charitable view that ' MacDonnell was actuated entirely by zeal for the public good in view of the excuse he put forward above that he wished it undone, and still more because of a statement he made that before he signed the proclamation he had been assured privately that Russell was safely out of the country. On the other hand there is no evidence that he acted thus, as his enemies said, in order to curry favour with those in power. His subsequent life is a passionate refutation of that slander. After this he makes no further contact with politics except for signing a Protestant petition for Catholic emancipation in 1812. Was it remorse that drove him to find solace in his work for the poor, in frequent visits to his old home in Glenariff, and-it is not improbable-in Bunting's collection of Irish music? There is extant a letter written by his son Dr. John MacDonnell of Dublin, some seventy-five years after the events just narrated. In it we feel how his description of natural scenery and well-known places is charged with the high emotional tension which surrounded his father at this time and which somehow communicated itself to his boyish mind. He wrote: 
"I remember, as vividly as if it were but ten years ago, taking a night ride from Belfast to Cushendall with my father seventy-five years since. We left home about midnight and arrived at Garron Point at dawn of a summer's morning. We tied our horses to bushes, and scrambled up to the extremity of the promontory; and I fancy I can see at 
this moment the noble view of the North Channel, bounded on the east by a long stretch of Wigtownshire, Ailsa, Arran and the ancient possessions of our Highland forefathers, Can tyre, Isla, and Jura, and by the Antrim coast on the west, some stars still glimmering in the deep blue over the lovely Ardclinis; and that I hear the dash of the waves, the scream of the sea-gulls, and the wild sweet whistle of the curlews. On this occasion my father told me that, when he settled in Belfast, and till his professional engagements rendered it impossible, he paid his mother a visit at this house [i.e., at Cushendall] once a fortnight. He left home at midnight, found a fresh horse waiting for him at Glenarm, spent some hours lying -on a sofa talking to his mother, and rode back to Belfast within the twenty-four hours-a ride of about one hundred English miles." 
There is something in this turning to his mother, who, it will be remembered, was a Protestant and who had brought up her sons in the Protestant faith, that may explain the indecisions and the divided loyalties of James MacDonnell. If one draws a diagonal across Ireland from Glenariff to Derrynane one finds there at this time a curiously similar though greater figure: reared in the Gaelic past, educated abroad, infected with radicalism, with Whiggery, turning away consciously from much of the past. O'Connell had served with the Lawyers' Yeomanry Corps in 1798 and in 1803, searching the houses in James's Street for croppies, but these anti-national activities had disappeared in the depths of his character and he remained always the full, the integral man, owing much of his greatness to his alliance with the historical process, and driving back to Kerry between the storms to draw strength and , inspiration from its eternal hills. Sean O'Faolain wrote of him: "Because of three things: Ambition; Ireland; ... and Religion, he managed in the end to possess himself, and to guide himself to ends that by their own greatness made him greater even than he was by nature." 
James MacDonnell was not ambitious. His Ireland was gone, he thought, never to return. It was his misfortune to have lived in the doldrums when the Irish mind ceased to function. , It was fifty years after his death when the Gaelic League under Douglas Hyde and Eoin MacNeill, a fellow Glensman, set out to redeem a nation and to derive inspiration for the future from the past. What then of his religion? There is no reference to it in his letters. It did not console his miseries or inspire his life. Yet, inspired by the Christian ideal, perhaps he found himself in the end by losing himself in the' poor. Back in l792 he had helped to found the Belfast Charitable Institution. In a prospectus published in that year the committee, of which he was one, had called attention to "the importance and utility of the industrious poor to a civilized and commercial nation.' It pointed out the hardships of their lives, inadequately fed and ill-housed in the new slums springing up .around the new factories, "supporting the existence of to-day by yesterday's labour," so that when sickness came they were in a worse position than the strolling beggar. This appeal to the enlightened self-interest of manufacturers and, traders was in accordance with the philanthropic spirit of the time, that "homicide philanthropy" which, in our own day, we have seen reduce a child's life to a card index number and lose it in' the bureaucratic machine. But there is in that same prospectus a sentence which must have been written by James MacDonnell and which shows that for him the poor were individual men, women and children. It stated that a fund was being raised "for the relief of the sick poor, of all descriptions, whether strangers or natives; that they may be supplied at their own , habitations [italics in original] with such medicines, medical attendance, and necessaries of life as may be fitted ,to the exigencies of their situations." Doctor MacDonnell fought his colleagues in Belfast for more than thirty years to maintain the principle ,that the poor should be attended to and relieved in their own homes. 
In 1797 he established and became first ' physician to the Belfast Fever Hospital, a modest building of six beds in Factory Row. In l815 the foundation stone of a more extensive building was laid in Frederick Street with (Dr. MacDonnell's touch?) an Irish MS. in the centre of the stone. In l820 the committee agreed to admit pupils to the hospital and in 1821 the first registered pupil was admitted. Dr. MacDonnell instituted a course of clinical lectures for these pupils and in 1827 delivered the first lecture. He was also in attendance three days weekly at the dispensary where he inoculated persons of all ages against the small-pox. He ordered and received from the London Humane Society "a special apparatus for the inflation of the lungs with other suitable instruments for the recovery of persons apparently dead from drowning." It was his intention to "have this apparatus located in a place of public note in the vicinity of the shipping." In 1829 he was appointed first visiting physician to the newly-opened hospital for the insane. As these activities show, he was the leading physician of Belfast with a reputation not only in medicine but also in geology and archaeology that extended far beyond ,the city. "No contemporary of any note in Britain was ignorant of his profound learning and distinguished name." But above all his learning, he was especially remarkable for his kindness to the poor. At the dispensary and hospital, in the slums, "so long as health permitted," says a. contemporary account, "he was to be seen, night and day, working in the districts like a very slave, or toiling in the wards for. hours." He steadfastly held to his principle of visiting, as far as possible, the poor in their own homes, and he resolutely opposed all proposals to pay the medical attendants at the hospital. But no sooner had his death occurred in 1845 than the agitation for salaries was revived and it was also resolved to stop giving medical relief in the homes of the poor. The History of the General Hospital states that "the principle of active benevolence which formed an inherent portion of his original character he was disposed to think was equally enjoyed by his brethren; and this led him to imagine that what formed with him the happiest return for days and nights of anxious exertion in bringing relief to the sick couch of poverty should equally sustain the spirits of all other men in similar circumstances . . . This trait was frequently unfortunate in its results; and on several occasions he became estranged from his brethren." . It is this "principle of active benevolence" ·which is fittingly commemorated in the elegy Túireadh an Doctúir Mhic Domhnaill written on his death by his namesake, one of the last of the Gaelic poets, Aodh MacDomhnaill. In a note on the poem Professor Eoin MacNeill writes: "In the poem, Dr. MacDonnell is praised chiefly for his kindness to the poor. I often heard the same praise of him from relatives of mine who remembered him. His popularity among the people of the Glens was so strong that it withstood the test of a change of religion." He was buried at Layde, near Cushendall, and the inscription on his gravestone reads: Erected in memory of James MacDonnell of Belfast and Murlough of this County, a Physician whose great abilities and greater benevolence made him venerated in the glens where he was born, and in Belfast where he died, A.D. 1845, in his 82nd year. Venerated by the poor but estranged from his professional brethren whose minds were more in tune with the spirit of the age he died a lonely man. Educated public opinion around him was being moulded by the theories of Ricardo, Mill and Malthus. But such theories which had withered up social conscience and ·made well-fed people everywhere content to regard slums as the will of God were alien to the mind of this inheritor of the Gaelic and Catholic tradition. Yet to all appearance the things he cared most for in the Gaelic past, its language and music, were dying too. There seemed to be nothing vital in his contemporary world which had its roots in that past. The resurgent spirit of democratic Ireland was for him a foreign importation and a distasteful one. He would have avoided the Young Irelanders 
and the Fenians as he had turned his back on the United Irishmen. But in the Gaelic League he would, I think, have found an honoured place. It is not just a coincidence that it was his grand-daughter, Miss Barbara MacDonnell, who presided over the first Glens of Antrim Feis in his native Glenariff in 1904. But that consolation was not for him. Unable to change as a stronger character might have done, either his own nature or the prevailing climate of opinion, and drawing no strength from those bulwarks of the personality of the common man, nationality and religion, he fought a lonely battle for his last remaining principle in Belfast. Yet here he would have found before he died a great ally in the church of his forefathers. For in this year which marks the centenary of his death we commemorate the introduction to Ireland of the Society of St. Vincent de Paul: a society based on a renewed conception of Christian charity an~ expressing its belief in the individual dignity of each human soul by the visitation of the poor in their own homes. The Gael can face the future. He can borrow from the contemporary world but, if he is to avoid the fate of James MacDonnell, he must assimilate his borrowings. He is an organism with his roots deep in the past. His history, his language, his literature, his music, his religion, are at once the fruits and the fertilisers of his growth. To cut his own roots brings death: and they run too deep to be transplanted easily to an alien clime. Croce has summed up the problem for him in a profound sentence: History is the past which is present.
