When a traveller reaches the long glens of Kerry-and especially if he has come from the noise and contention and vain dust of Dublin- his spirit bathes in quietude and is refreshed. Perhaps he recalls the lines, half jest, half earnest, that were made about this country of the far south-west, by two bards: 
Uíbh rathach gránna na ndragún liath. [note: Cf. Burduin Bheaga, Ed. T. F. O'Rahilly.]
Iveragh ugly, where grey dragons abound; Clancarthy where wheat can't be grown in the ground; And Desmond, with bleak empty hills to the west
Three places that never Saint Patrick blessed. 
Iveragh, ever illustrious land, Clancarthy, where wheat would grow wild on the strand ; And Desmond, with high kingly hills for the rest; Sure, Patrick left these unto God to be blessed ! 

When he comes in the evening to Killarney, the innermost glory of that country, it seems too beautiful to be real. Through gold-flecked granite walls he goes, while the air is full of fine rainfall like powdered diamonds, to behold suddenly the wide lough, and the woods of the Eagle's Nest high in the sun. A castle, blurred by age, is by the water, to recall the nobles who lived here once, of MacCarthy or O'Sullivan lineage, and the gillies who brought back the red deer from the hill. On the traveller goes, greeted on the way by those gigantic men (clerics and laymen), the sons of Kerry, till he reaches Muckross, and walks through parkland to the abbey : and here, most of all, he is awed by the wonder of the place, as if the past were more real than the present, and the living were but shadows of the dead. For here, where the ancient tree spreads its branches over the cloisters, and in the roofless church, the names of the clans of Kerry are thick on the gravestones. Princes lie here, and noble ladies; friars, scholars, poets; these, and humbler folk of the same stock, whose last happiness it was to be privileged to find rest in so sacred a place. The dead who lie here are those who were true heirs of the splendour of Kerry: they gave to the hills their names, and to Kerry its fame in song. The folk pause to spell out a name and see the abbey and hurry on their way to gayer places : they come and pass ; but the great dead and their memories remain, inseparable from Loch Lein and Muckross, and now our theme. Two of the chief poets of Ireland were entombed here. One was Eoghan Ruadh Ó Suilleabháin (1748-1784), lovingly called Eoghan a' Bheoil Bhinn, he who had worked as a labourer for boors, while his heart meditated so many jubilant or mournful songs. It was he who carried his spade to another scholar bard, Seamas Mac Gearailt, at the smithy, and sang: 
A chara mo chléibh, ‘s a Shéamais [note: Cf. Burduin Bheaga.]
Seamas, the loving and laughing, of comrades the best, Son of the Geraldine breed, the Greeks of the West, Muster your craft and make me a haft, not too big, And fasten it into my spade-for my trade is to dig. 
When work-day is ended, and spent is the strength of my arm, And the steward affirming it's little I'm worth to the farm, Softly I'll sing of death, the ender of woe, And tell how Troy was destroyed and its pride laid low. 
All the clergy of Kerry (they say), and the people of that countryside, gathered at Muckross when Eoghan of the Sweet Voice, labourer, soldier, and harum-scarum adventurer, but a poet so notable, a Burns of the Gael, was laid to rest in the ruined abbey, late in the Penal age. Twenty-two years before his birth- that is to say, a lifetime earlier
a yet finer poet was buried yonder before the chancel arch : the most racial of all the singers of Kerry, and by the estimate of some, the greatest of all poets of Gaelic speech : the mighty Aodhagán Ó Rathaille,--whose dates are given as 1670-1726. That storm of national passion and despair, in which the Gaelic order came to its end, the great houses were unroofed and the abbeys began to crumble into ruins : those last throes, in which men hoped for a while to see the old life restored, but instead beheld its passing: these things were the lifestory of Egan O'Rahilly, and come before us in all their moving power when we read his verses. The poetry of Egan O'Rahilly was the death song of an age, and yet gave that age the immortality of art. 
After Limerick 
Who can measure or imagine the suffering of the seventeenth century; when, in three most ruthless wars, the immemorial Gaelic civilisation was rooted up, and the race all but slain ? First, there was the aftermath of the Elizabethan war, when the Earls were defeated and famine spread over the land: famine so fearfully described by Edmund Spenser, who told of the people, "anatomies of death," creeping forth to feed on shamrocks. At that time, Munster's population was halved, by starvation and the sword. The Plantation of Ulster ended the last Irish principalities. In Cromwell's time, the sons of princes and the Catholic gentry of the Pale rose again, but were defeated; and then the Puritan terror re-enacted the desolation of forty years earlier. Towns were emptied by slaughter, and every Catholic church or cathedral or abbey, was silenced. Yet a third time, by the Williamite war, which took place in our poet's boyhood, rapine spread far and wide, even into the ends of the island ; and Ireland was a three-times stricken desert, when the new Planters took possession. What we have read of, with horror, in our own days, the devastation of Europe, the driving of populations, the enslavement of masses, the burning or starving of cities, and the whitening of the very earth under invasion : these terrors, which seemed almost unimaginable until they were verified before us : these things were Ireland's fate- three times in a century. Such grief it cost, to subdue the olden nation, and with such hatred was it hated. Egan O'Rahilly, as we have said, was a lad when- the last of those wars was waged. He was born, about 1678, somewhere in the country east of Killarney, the son of a well-to-do countryman who died while the boy was young. It is stated in several books that O'Rahilly's father really was an O'Reilly from Ulster, who went to Kerry to seek preliminary education for the priesthood, for it was a common thing in those days to study the classics in the Kerry schools before going to the clerical colleges on the Continent. This O'Reilly; in a fight with some landlord's buck, killed his man, and therefore had to abandon his hope of ordination : he settled in Kerry, married there, and the people instinctively changed O Raghallaigh to O Rathaille. This tale is probably mere legend, though a line in Egan's verse seems to claim Northern blood. The poet, it is understood, was named Egan after his mother who was of- the MacEgan family ; a family ever illustrious in scholarship. As men of genius so often owe their distinction to their mothers, it may be that Egan O'Rahilly owed his to the MacEgan blood. His mother wrought well for her two orphan sons. She " owned at one time half of the townland of Scrahanaveal; 'which, 
however, under the stress of circumstances, she relinquished, and came to dwell at Cnoc-an-Chorrfhiaidh, also called Stagmount, a little to the south-east of Meentogues." [note: Dánta A. Uí R. – Introduction] Egan seems to have been designed for a learned calling ; his brother, Morgan O'Rahilly, though the younger, farmed the land. Of Egan's youth, nothing is told. Somewhere in Kerry's famous schools he gained a classical education ; and from Gaelic scholars he received the bardic tradition. He speaks of his people as followers of MacCarthy Mór. They had held this rank immemorially, according to his claim (but he may have had the MacEgans rather than the O'Rahillys in mind), when he described the Mac Carthies as : 
Na flatha fá raibh mo shean roimh éag do Chríost, The princes my forbears served before Christ died. 
He evidently hoped to be poet, genealogist, historian to the chief, in the manner of the bards down the centuries. For that he had prepared himself, in mastering the literary arts. Plainly, then, as a young man, he did not realise that the day of the bards and the princes or chiefs was over forever. He did not know, what is so plain to us, that after the Boyne and Aughrim, and the fall of Limerick and the fight of the Wild Geese, the old Gaelic world was stricken to death. 
Such was Gaeldom 
Now there was a very good reason for the slowness with which stricken Gaeldom knew that its doom was upon it. That reason was, that the Gaelic social order possessed an intense local vitality. Every Gaelic community was a little kingdom, feeding itself, making its own clothing, and having its own masons, smiths, weavers, carpenters and other craftsmen, as well as its own men of letters and teachers, even its harpers : so th1t it could live on, and maintain the full cycle of customary ways, even when it was isolated. From Kerry, away across Connacht and the Antrim Glens, to the Scottish Highlands and the Isles, cells of Gaelic life continued in being, in O'Rahilly's lifetime, though the Stuart kingship which had been their bond of union, was stricken, and soon would be gone, like the soul from the body. The persistence of the Gaelic order in these little societies could be illustrated from many a Gaelic poet's verses, made for the chiefs who remained. One of the finest and most typical of late Gaelic poet's was Mairi nighean Alasdair Ruaidh, Mary Mac Leod, [note: Gaelic Songs of Mary MacLeod. Ed. J. Carmichael Watson (Blackie, 1934).] who was singing in the Isles as late as 1705 in praise of 
Sarmhac Mhic Leoid 
Nam bratach sróil, 
Bu railt mu'n ór, 
Bu bhinn caismeachd sgeoil 
Aig luchd-astair is ceoil na hEireann.
 
id est : MacLeod's excellent son, of the satin banners; unstinting in gold, and sweet theme of story among the travelling bands of Eire. 
In Mairi's verses, we have a full, rich and fascinating picture of the Great House : and behold, though it has the local colour of the Isles, it rings with Irish allusions, síoda na Gailbhinn, " silk of Galway “ and the like, to shew how Mac Leod's country was still one Gaeltacht with our own,-portion of one farextending patriarchal Gaelic world. Owing to the forsaking of the Catholic allegiance by most of the Scots chiefs, the old life in Scotland escaped the full fury that Ireland endured, and therefore lasted longer. 5 [note: Perhaps the Act of 1748 which abolished hereditary jurisdictions in Great Britain may be taken as marking the formal end of the Gaelic system, though men reared under it would continue in the habit of that life for a few decades.]
Dr. Johnson and Mr. Boswell journeyed through that Northern Gaeldom as late as 1773 ; that is, long after the final ruin of Irish Gaeldom, and found the fabric of society, though gravely strained, still intact. Hardly any book is of greeter value, or interest, to students of these things, than Dr. Johnson's account of his tour. [note: A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland, by Samuel Johnson. (A convenient edition is that in the Traveller's Library).] To the Londoner, that patriarchal Highland life was so strange, that he described it with greater vividness than most native writers. He marvelled, and largely envied what he saw- testimony valuable from so unusual a witness. Gaeldom was like the Homeric world. The Isle of Raasay, self-subsistent, and supporting a greater number of people than would the same area of rich farming land in England, Dr. Johnson likened to the isle of Phaeacia, under Homer's good king Alcinous. He noted that the Gaelic social order accounted for the intensive population, and its plain but generous comfort. When beeves were killed, every clansman had his customary share : the head to the smith, the udder to the piper, and so on,-" and so many pieces followed these prescriptive claims, that the Laird's was at last but little." The maids of every household had little or no " pecuniary wages," but they had a share of the sheep, and did the spinning, as their emolument. Thus, there was provision for all- a true distributive system. Johnson was impressed by the high breeding that this order of society manifested. " The girls of the Highlands are all gentlewomen." Every running horseboy claimed respect: " civility seems part of the national character." With Johnson, the word civility meant high refinement. He observed that the Gaelic order, in which every member of society stood in some customary or blood relation to the chief, so that the poor were not thrust out of sight and out of mind, but ensured of attention like the humble members of one family, resulted in this uniform, high standard of dignity: for, “ politeness, the natural product of royal government, is diffused from the laird through the whole clan.”
The Big Houses 
When in Johnson's pages we have viewed the still living Gaelic social order under the analytic eyes of a modern observer, from without, we can turn back to our Kerry poet with a fresh understanding. For in O'Rahilly's poetry we see that order from within, painted more lavishly than by any other poet, and painted in the last days of its survival in our land. What can be compared with the description of the House of Ua Ceallacháin, which O'Rahilly gives in his lamentation for that chieftain, in the year 1724? The fairy spirit, Cliodhna, muse of Munster, speaks (lines 65-11:04) : 
Do dhearcas ar sí, ‘n-a ríogh bhrogh ceolmhar,
Síodaidhe breaca, is bratacha sróill ghlain
Cuilg dá ngormadh othair ag ól miodh
Is laochra ag imirt ar fidhchill na fóirne

Treighid gan téarnamh méala mór liom
An chluain fá gháir na gcág gan teora
Glór nan Gall go teann san órbhrogh
Mar a mbíodh imirt is gliogar fear fóirne.

Here we are shewn the “ musical kingly house " of O'Callaghan, with its doors opening upon courts of amber light, its airy chambers and laden tables, its chess-playing warriors, feasters, scholars and nobles conversing on the houses of Europe: the poet tells how the bugle would sound on the plain and the heavy cry of the chase descend from the sides of the misty hills ; how foxes and red bucks, hares, water-hens and pheasants would be started, and how the prince's hounds and men would return wearied from the uplands ; and how now, alas, the voice of the stranger is loud in the golden dwelling : glór na nGall go teann san órbrugh. Petty critics make little of poetry of this kind, because it is not " a criticism of life" (a piece of Victorian jargon), and lacks psychology. They might equally make little of Homer's poetry. If they were to read (supposing that they could read) the early books of the Odyssey, they would find in the account of Telemachus's visit to the houses of Nestor and Menelaus, this identical delight in the furniture of the world, this feeling for the zest of pure, poetic living. For us, this poetry is Homeric in spirit and vigour, and Irish in its intimate appeal. We read, and we yearn for those old days, that wholesome, happy life. The comparison with Homer is inescapable. The Gaelic poets were well a ware of the likeness of their background to the Homeric world, and more than one proposed to translate Homer into Gaelic, - Seán Clárach Mac Domhnaill in Munster, in the generation after O'Rahilly, and Riocárd Báiréad in Connacht still later. In Scotland, Eoghan Mac Lochlainn did do eight books of the Iliad into what we call the Ossianic metre, proving that the Gaelic lay was admirably fitted to express the spirit of Greek epic. Witness the first lines of the Iliad, in his version,
Aithris, a bhan-dia nam fonn ! 
Fearg mhic Pheleuis nan glonn aigh, 
Fearg mhillteach a chiúrr a' Ghreig 
Le beud nan deich mile cradh, 
Fearg a sguab a dh'ifrinn duinn 
Miltean lan-ghaisgeach romh'n am, 
An cuirp rúisgt' aig comh mar phronn, 
'S aig uil-saltainn nam fiadh-bheann 
B'e sud rún an dúilich aird : 
Ach ciod bu cheann-fath do'n strith? 
C'um na chog an t-Aichioll córr 
'S ceud-fhlath an tslóigh, bu mhór brígh? 
One of O'Rahilly's shorter pieces has been described as Homeric by almost 
every critic who has discussed him. It is that entitled An File i gCaisleán an Tochair. He has traversed the land, and has come to Castle Tochar, formerly the abode of Tadhg an Dúna, a MacCarthy who died in O'Rahilly's youth; the castle now is held by a settler named Warner. To the poet's surprise, he has found here, even under the stranger, that which he had missed elsewhere : the old hospitality, the old abundance: and he breaks into six verses of Homeric description, closing with a sort of astonished thankfulness to God, that a foreigner should be as good a host as a MacCarthy. 
Do shiubhlaigh mise an Mhimhain mhín
‘S Ó Chúinne an Doire go Dún na Ríogh,
Mo chumha níor briseadh cér shúgach sinn
Go feicsint bruigh Thaidhg an Dúna.
All of Munster I travelled, from Derrynane [?] to Dun-na-Riogh, and never was the gloom lifted from my spirits, till I beheld the mansion that once was Tadhg an Duna's. In my heart and my mind it seemed to me, that the dead long dead was yet living : by the feasting of youths on meat and wine, punch-drinking and brandy : flesh on the spits, jowl from the water, with music and singing and drinking healths; kennels of beagles baying ; A company going, and a company coming; and a company sweetly entertaining the comers ; a company, too, praying on the bare flags, gently melting the heavens; [And so it seemed] till I learnt from one of the place that 'twas Warner, the princely, the gentle, honest, and faithful, who now was in this famed old lime-white dwelling, a prince not grudging to the traveller : 'Tis God who made all things: He who has sent a noble one in place of the noble who is gone, one who gives to the people, to the clerics, to scholars, a true knight, great-hearted. 
The Poet of Princes 
Did Warner know that he had been immortalised (for nothing else is 
known of him, and he would be forgotten long since but for his generosity of a day)-or did he see no more in great Aodhagán than a passing country bard in homespun? The poet certainly was valued in his time, by many hosts of consequence. Turlough O Carolan, most famous if not most racial of our harpers, was his contemporary (born in the same year, by some accounts), and was welcome in the houses of new Gall and old Gael, throughout the land. Just as the economy of country life kept the Big House in being, the customary place of bard and harper remained, for a time. So we find Egan O'Rahilly making ceremonial poems for various notables, and for some Anglo-Irish as well as Gaelic nobles. Finghín O Donnchadha of the Glen is saluted, buaincheap cosnaimh dá thír go treán, "firm stake of defence to his country" : this was the patriot chief most feared by the foreigner in Kerry. For Viscount Kenmare, the poet makes a marriage song, delicately lovely: telling of joy among the bird flocks and the leaping fish of the streams, of trees flowering in winter, of quiet seas, and comeliness upon the land. The Kenmare family were Catholics, but not of Irish stock. Did they value aright this richest of their Irish possessions- a poem by Ua Rathaille in their honour ? Lamentations, too, the poet made for his patrons; for that was an honourable duty of the bard. For Diarmuid O Laoghaire of Cillin, he made, as early as 1696, the lamentation that is considered by Dr. Dinneen to be his best ; and what a galaxy of sublime epithets he uses, to commemorate Gerald, son of the Knight of Glin,
Créad é an tlacht so ar cheannaibh Éireann?
Créad do bheoghnuigh snódh na gréine?
Acht ríflaith de phríomh na nGréagach
I gclúid san bhfeart gan phreab ná éifeacht.
What is this depression on the chiefs of
Ireland : what is this that has dimmed the 
very sunlight ?-what but that the very prince of Grecian stock lies in the grave, without life or movement ? Hawk of Munster, hawk of the Glen, hawk of the Shannon !- phoenix, pearl of Castlemartyr, pearl of the Suir, pearl of Limerick ! - candle of knowledge, rose of the poets, vinetree of Callan .. .. 
On goes the poem, litany-like, reciting the qualities of the dead man, and the sorrow that has been laid on the land. What pride there must have been in the houses of Munster, when O'Rahilly spoke thus, in his throbbing, full-vowelled, chiming lines, of the fallen ones : how sorrow must have been lifted to a plane of dignity, in which it ennobled the living with the dead ! Not always was the poet well received. Twice O'Rahilly made poems for Lord Kenmare, and evidently was rewarded; a third time he went to him with verses, but now he was turned away. This seems to have happened in the poet's old age. He broke forth extempore (so runs the tradition) in lines that give unenviable notoriety to the churlish act: swift, artless lines in which the Gaelic indignation bursts forth, and see how the poet's scorn is hammered home : 
Do leathnuigh an ciach diacrach fám sheanachroidhe dúr. 
The chill that's on my heart, that’s hard and old, Since Conn's high kingdom now the strangers hold, And the clouded sun as Munster's light goes down, Tis these that bring me to visit you, Valentine Brown ! 
Great Cashel void : no clerics there, nor guest: O'Brien's turreted castle an otter's nest : Duhallow with no king to wear our crown 'Tis these that bring me to visit you, Valentine Brown! 
The deer have left the hill : the hunter's loss : The alien raven roosts in the woods of Ross : The fish from the rivers are gone : the heavens frown And so I come to visit you, Valentine Brown ! 
Darinish no more the home of the Earls we knew, Since overwave our Hawk to Hamburg flew : Old eyes grow dim : with endless tears they drown And I grope my way to visit- a Valentine Brown ! 
Indignation 
For although O'Rahilly, like O'Carolan, might find many good hosts, it was growing clear that the old order was stricken. We can see the knowledge dawning in the poet's mind. There is his terrific poem on " The ruin that befell the great families of Ireland " 
Monuar-sa an Charrth’fhuil tráighte, tréithlag! 
Gan rígh ar an gcóip ná treorach tréan mhear! 

- wherein he speaks of Ireland as “ a land stripped naked," and "a land of fetters,"- and, significant saying: 
Tír gan chomhthrom do bochtaibh le déanamh
A land where the poor cannot get justice : 
for such was the sum of the Glorious Revolution, as it was experienced by honest folk in all the three kingdoms. Here the poet summons all his powers of declamation, to tell of the dogs of Bristol thirstily drinking the heart blood of his country; her countenance blackened like coal ; her mines, woods, quarries broken or burnt : while the planters reign in the ruined castles of princes. O Doherty, O Moore, O Rourke, O Donnell, are dethroned, and as for the O Briens
Síol mBrian, dearbh ‘na nGallaibh le treimhse :
they, for a long space, have gone over to the English. The Geraldines, Burkes, Barrys and seafaring Walshes: they have lost all sway. So, in a crescendo of agony the poet tells of his people's plight, and cries
Aiseag do Ghaedhealaibh déin, a Chríost, I n-am: 
Restore the Gaels, O Christ, while yet there's time! 
It is in the envoi of this poem that O Rathaille tells that he himself has come so low, that for lack of patrons he goes wanting shoes. Another glimpse of the poet's fortunes we gain from the poem made when he has removed his dwelling, through poverty, to Tonn Tóime: the Wave of Tóime, at the mouth of Castlemaine harbour. Here, as the unaccustomed thunder of the waves disturbs his sleep, he recalls the chiefs of the branches of Clan Carthy, the royal clan that is gone : but mark how, at the end, the indomitable spirit of him and his race spits defiance, even from death, and proclaims the resolve never to yield allegiance to the stranger. . This piece has been freely, but superbly, rendered by Mr. James Stephens. Let us borrow his " re-incarnation " of the poem, which is as fine in his Bearla as in the original. 
Do shearg mo chroidhe im chliteach, do buaióir mo leann. 
My heart is withered and my health is gone, For they who were not easy put upon, Masters of mirth and of fair clemency, Masters of wealth and gentle charity, They are all gone. Mac Caura Mór is dead, Mac Caura of the Lee is finished ; Mac Caura of Kanturk joined clay to clay And gat him gone, and bides as deep as they. 
Their years, their-gentle deeds, their flags are furled, And deeply down, under the stiffened world, 
In chests of oaken wood are princes thrust To crumble day by day into the dust A mouth might puff at; nor is left a trace Of those who did of grace all that was grace. O wave of Cliona, cease thy bellowing ! And let my ears forget a while to ring At thy long, lamentable misery : The great are dead indeed, the great are dead, And I, in little time, will stoop my head And put it under, and will be forgot With them, and be with them, and thus be not: 
Here, now, is the last verse, in which the poet touches the depth of despair, and yet uprears his spirit to give voice to imperishable hope,
Ease thee, cease thy long keening, cry no more: End is, and here is end, and end is sore, And to all lamentation be there end . . . 
If I might come on thee, O howling friend! Knowing that sails were drumming on the sea Westward to Eire, and that help would be Trampling for her upon a Spanish deck, I'd ram thy lamentation down thy neck ! 
Poetry like this was not made to please a patron. It was the passion of a noble spirit, bursting into utterance, because it must. It was the theme-verse of that symphony of song which filled Munster throughout the century of the Penal subjection. O Rathaille, the poet of princes, thus headed those who were the poets of the people. He stands in the 'sunset of the old order, and gives words to those who will watch through the Penal night. To this, his art was peculiarly suited. Though he had planned, as we think, to be file to the MacCarthies, he was the first file to break completely with the classic, syllabic metres, which only scholarly hearers could appreciate. Other fili had used the easy, stirring, accented metres sometimes, but seldom for the ceremonial kind of poem : they deemed these metres fitted rather to the mere bard. O Rahilly never used any, save the popular metres. When he praised a MacCarthy, or an O Laoghaire, or an O Mahony, or recited the pedigree of O Ceallachain, he used the amhrán verse by which every hearer, high or lowly, would be moved. If the old order had been restored by a Jacobite victory, O Rahilly and his successors would have been at once popular and princely, even as the bards already were, in Highland Gaeldom. His command, therefore, of the powerful accented verse enabled him to tum from noble elegies, composed for patrons, to give to the penniless outlawed race such fierce lines as those on the tyrant Dawson
Do b’fearrde mise is gach nduine atá ag fulang pian Gall
An bás dá sciobadh tá tuilleadh agus fiche bliadhain ann.
Better it were for me, and for all whom the Gall torment Had death but swept him away this score of years. 
Those poems of hate are bitter reading. They were a bitter need, to keep up the spirit of resistance, when all seemed lost. 

The Jacobites 
We see O Rahilly, therefore, as the first of those poets of poverty : of honourable poverty. Consider the lines that he wrote for Donnchadh O hIcidhe, when that penalised gentleman of the old order left Limerick, to escape the test oath of the time. 
He tells O Hickey how easily he could set down his noble genealogy; but now, other things must be minded. " You must go, O hIcidhe, from your own land, 
to shun the tests that have brought Ireland under sorrow: put your trust in Christ, the Lord unfailing ; do not give up the eternal things for the good things of this world: God yet will tum back your banishment, and lay low the enemies that drove you from your right.'' The verses are simple as the humblest country song. They were meant, perhaps, to go from mouth to mouth, comforting every man made homeless for loyalty's sake, in that time of upheaval : whereof the poet himself was one. The oath that drove O Hickey from his possessions, was that which the usurpers imposed on persons suspected of loyalty to the King in exile : the Oath of Abjuration, with which they were busy when Anne had succeeded to William, and James III was cheated of his crown. Nowadays, Irishmen commonly fail to understand their ancestors' devotion to the House of Stuart ; but, unless that is understood, the history of full two centuries is obscure. The subject is large and difficult. It needs a thesis for its proper treatment. Let us attempt briefly to summarise the reason for that Jacobite loyalty which rings through our Gaelic literature. It began when Aodh O Neill won the battle at Béal an Atha Bhuidhe in Ulster in 1598, that seemed to mark the tum of our national fortunes. O Neill sent O Hagáin-that is, the hereditary officer who inaugurated the O Neills as Kings of Ulster at Tulach Óg- to Scotland, to invite James VI to assume the Crown of Ireland.[note: The Flight of the Earls, by Tadhg O Cianain. Ed. Rev. Paul Walsh. (Gill, 1916). See p. 17.] There is deep significance in O Neill's act. He himself was alleged by English enemies to aim at establishing himself as King of Ireland- a rank to which a duly inaugurated Ua Neill had, in truth, good title,- but he did not aspire to such exalted office. He may have deemed himself unfitted to be king, but more surely he knew how the jealousies of the past stood in the way of 
general acceptance. Irish kingship never had been hereditary, nor had it gone by primogeniture. Always, by the native system, a king's son was set aside, and a senior cousin, from the deirbhfhine succeeded. This system had been a perpetual cause of weakness; for, whenever a king or chief died, continuity was broken, and a new departure made. In war, when a king was killed, the war ended, and the cause was abandoned. In Scotland, the Gaels had modified the native order, by adopting primogeniture from the Normans; and, under this rule, they had built up a strong royal House. The Stuarts, who were regarded as Gaels, since the crown came to them from maternal Gaelic descent, and they had become well Gaelicised, were a brilliant stock, giving fine rulers, soldiers and scholars to the throne. If, then, the Crown of Ireland were worn by a Stuart, there would be a regular succession, a continuous rule; while the prince would be an inheritor of Gaelic tradition, not less than an O Neill, O Connor, O Brien or Mac Carthy. That was the great Earl's conception. It was supported, evidently, by his advisers, and was shared by some of the chief poets. For, although James did not accept O Neill's offer at that time, preferring to secure the English Crown first, we find Fearghal Óg Mac-an-Bhaird saluting James after his accession in London, in a poem of exceptional vigour [note: Ed. Lambert McKenna, S.J. (I.T.S., 1940). See poem 44.]
Trí coróna i gcairt Shéamuis. 
" Three crowns in James' s charter . . . . That young prince of high spirit, James Stuart, shall have Eire's wondrous crown : an honour, I know, he well deserves. '' 
That famous poet recalls the ancestry of the new king, hailing him as a true Gaelic monarch of both Gael and Gall : "myrrh or incense is not more fragrant than thy wine-blood; gold is not equal to it " ; and he bids him " talk not of 
taking a new territory (meaning Ireland), seeing thou hast already a right to red-sworded Eire." Now, we moderns can smile, or frown, at the enthusiasm of the Gaels of Ireland for that first of the Stuarts, to be King of Ireland, unworthy as he proved ; and we can well feel anger at a later Stuart's betrayal of our people's attachment: but let us consider what came of O Neill's design. For a century, while the Stuarts were our kings, Ireland attained a unity never known before. It is not merely that the old Irish and the Anglo-Irish came together in the war for Charles against Cromwell, but that Ulster Gaels and Munster and Connacht Gaels, acknowledged for reign after reign the same Sovereign : that was something hitherto unknown. The bloody feuds, by which 46 per cent. of the O Neills had suffered violent death in family battles of succession, ended. When a Stuart died, his son succeeded, and the laws went on, without interruption. As a result of this continuity, Ireland for the first time felt itself to be a modern nation. It had national Parliaments under the Confederation and in 1688-'91. It put armies in the field, not as followers of factions, but as national armies : Patrick Sarsfield served in every province, the first of our military leaders to do so. Battles like Aughrim, and the siege of Limerick, were not skirmishes; they were acts of a nation at war for its Constitution and its rights. This is what we have to conceive, if we are to understand O Rahilly when, in one of his most exquisite poems,one, moreover, which "seems to have been very popular," - the poet tells of a vision of the fairy folk: 
Maidean sul smaoin Titan a chosa do luadhaill.
" One morning, ere yet the Sun thought of stirring, I met on the summit of a high, fair hill, a band of maidens from the fairy mansions....” 
He tells how these maidens lighted three candles over every harbour, "in the name of the king desired, who will be with us soon "-three candles, for the three Stuart kingdoms. Thus did O Rahilly feed his people with hope of the return of that Gaelic and Catholic line of kings, under whom the old order would be renewed in three lands..... And he was right. We can see now, that the old order was already doomed to die ; but we can see, too, when we see with understanding, that a successful Stuart counter-revolution would have made possible the revival of the Catholic civilisation, not only in Ireland, but in Scotland and England. That was, in truth, the issue. Friend and foe knew it; and it was to the tune of Lillibulero, that savage song from the underworld, that the old civilisation was drummed away, perhaps forever. O Rahilly was no fool. He could dream, he could sing of his hopes in lines of wonderful loveliness; but he was a realist with it all. He knew, for a grim reality, that the old life lingering in little communities, must be linked on the golden thread of a nation, if it was to be renewed: and he saw the Stuart cause as the cause of that nation : which it was. Only when the French Revolution (a thing then undreamed of) had come to pass, would the nations find another basis for the unity of their people, than patriarchal devotion to a prince. 
"Gile na Gile" 
What was the kind of him, this poet who used the Gaelic art and the copious classical imagery of Kerry's schools, now to praise the great folk of Munster, and now to teach the folk the lessons of defiance to the foreigner, and loyalty to their faith and race ? We see him as one of that short, broad, dark dynamic type, indomitable of spirit, a born leader of his people, such as we have known in modern Munster, when just such men as he nerved and guided the folk. Tradition tells quaint tales of his ways: how he fooled some planter at a fair, or astonished and won a Greek book from a bookseller in Cork, who did not guess that the rugged man in frieze was a Hellenist and could read his Homer. Some small holding sustained him, and his family. His wife's name is not ascertained. He had two daughters, one of whom married a Moynihan and left descendants at Derrycunnihy. It is from his brother Morgan O Rahilly, apparently, that the name O Rahilly descended to distinguished bearers in our day. That is about all we can tell of him, save the little that is personal in his poems. Yet, hardly any figure among our poets is more real to us. The intensity of passion in his verse makes us recognise the man. None but 0 Rahilly, we feel, could have written Gile na Gile, " Brightness of Brightness," the poem which was the first of many and many an aisling in the century that followed. It is the song of his inmost love for his country, in which he personifies Ireland, and describes this vision-maiden, this aisling, in images as delicate and richly-hued as the mountains about Loch Léin; in lines so musical, that they seem less the voice of a man than of a harp, when deep chords are played. To conceive this poem's full meaning, it is well, perhaps, to imagine the ill-shod poet, as he treads the roads of Kerry, by woody Muckross or dark Dunloe, and he gathers his clouts about him when boors ride out from their estates, and splash with mud the horseless Gael, to them a nameless half-outlaw. On he goes, when they have galloped to their debauches and oblivion ; on he goes, treading still the land he loves and meditating lines imperishable as its beauty : its beauty that he sees as a maiden on the highway- 
Gile n agile do chonnarc ar an slighe I n-uaigneas.
The Brightness of Brightness, I met upon the way in loneliness ,
Crystal of crystal in her grey-fleckt blue eye shining,· Sweetness of sweetness in her voice without repining : Redness and whiteness in glowing cheeks were blending .... 
It is a Jacobite poem ; but surely it is more. The poet is not telling us merely that Ireland's hope is in the Stuart restoration (that never came) ; rather is he singing of something imperishable, an ideal beauty that will outlive the tyrants - as it has done. " Brightness of Brightness " is a poet's word for what a prose-writer would call " idealism." Brightness of Brightness was something in O Rahilly's heart and spiritual vision far finer than temporal patriotism ; or rather, the inspiration of that temporal quality. Brightness of Brightness-it was O Rahilly's watchword to his people and to later generations : it is the vision that beckoned Padraic Pearse to the end of his road. Who can doubt that Egan O Rahilly was the voice of Ireland, in that age of ruin and despair, speaking the message of no surrender ? There seldom can have been a spirit of greater fortitude than his. A poet, so acutely sensitive to beauty, loving so keenly the old life, its castles, its princes, its hunts, feasts, 
music, mirth and humanity; a proud man, feeling humiliation more than others: he must have suffered more than other men can imagine. Yet, how magnificent, how Promethean, is his defiance, even on his bed of death ! In utter poverty, his house, land and cattle taken from him, he is a dying man as he takes refuge in the house of his daughter, Mistress Moynihan; and there he makes his last and bravest poem,
Cabhair ní ghoiread go gcuirtear mé I gcruinn-chomhrainn.
For help I will not call, till I'm laid in the narrow coffin, by the Book, if I called for it, I would not gain it- my brain shakes like a wave, my chief hope is gone : the knave has swept the game from the crowned king : 
From this heavy ruin that came on the kingly race, the waters from my brows plough bitterly : I will cease forthwith, for Death comes without delay,- ! will follow after the heroes I loved to the grave : those princes my fathers served ere Christ was born. 
Such was the indomitable man who was laid in the O Rahilly tomb in Muckross, among the dead princes of Kerry. Brightness of Brightness is still there, in that lovely place in the sunlight and the glory of the waters. When we yearn for words to tell of that beauty, let us borrow them from Egan O Rahilly, chief among our poets, and dearest to our land. 
Notes 
The complete poems of Egan O'Rahilly, edited by Rev. P. S. Dinneen and Tadhg O’Donoghue (" Toma") are published by the Irish Texts Society: Danta Aodhagáin Ui Rathaille. The second edition (1911) should be used. Eleven of the poet's best pieces are edited by Séamus O hAodha, M.A., in Aodhagán O Rathaille (Educ. Co. of Ireland, 1926), with an invaluable essay of 65 pages, on the poet, in Irish, and vocabularies. In Mr. Daniel Corkery's Hidden Ireland (Gill, 1925), there is an incomparable study of O'Rahilly, to which the present writer, like all others who treat the subject, must acknowledge a great debt. 

7 Ewan Mac Lachlan's Gaelic Verse. Ed. John McDonald, M.A. (Inverness, 1938). 
8 Re-incarnations. By James Stephens. (Macmillan).


See also Stair Fhir-cheart ar Eirinn, Ed. Nessa Ni Sheaghdha (Oifig an tSolathair, 1941). This is a translation of Hugh Reily's book, Ireland's 
Case Briefly Stated, which was printed somewhere on the Continent in 1695, and smuggled into Ireland. Reily, who had held office under James II and VII had gone into exile with the king, and wrote this book to expound the Irish case, and to admonish the Stuarts to deal more fairly by our country. Royalist Ireland by Gerard Murphy Studies, Dec. 1935, gives a fine analysis of Reily's work; but Mr. Murphy will pardon the present writer for suggesting that he seems to mistake the Irish particular loyalty to the Stuarts for a loyalty to any royal house ; and does not realise how the Jacobites tradition led on to Wolfe Tone's movement. The Jacobites and the United Men were both counter-revolutionaries, in revolt against the Penal usurpation.
