When the present Bishop of
Kilmore, the Most Rev. Dr.
Lyons, came out of Maynooth
at the dawn of the century, carrying
lightly his theological laurels and a heart
of gold, his first curacy was in my native
parish of Lower Killeavy, in South
Armagh. I had the privilege of serving
his first Sunday Mass in the outlying
church of Lislea, at the foot of Slieve
Gullion. We became friends at first
sight and our friendship has grown closer
and warmer with the years.
I recall these facts at the outset
because that early association of the new
curate and the acolyte was fated to set
the course of my future. In time it led
me into journalism, thereby affording me
a wider and fuller experience of life and
a deeper insight in to the human drama
than I could otherwise have hoped to gain.
I had misgivings when invited by the
Editor of The Capuchin Annual to write
some memories of my boyhood in the
Gap of the North. It was a happy
boyhood, spent on a farm on the brow
of a weather-beaten hill, a thousand feet
above Camlough Lake. But it was in
the main an ordinary and uneventful
boyhood as well, with little in it, perhaps,
to catch and hold a reader's interest.
Moreover, memory unaided is an uncertain thing. However !
Our land was sour-hearted. It was set
in a moorland region, reclaimed in the
toil and sweat of earlier generations who
had been driven from their loamy heritage
on the plains to make way for the Planters
of James the First and Oliver.
There was one of the name, however,
who never submitted. Instead of following his ruined kindred to moil for existence in the stony wastes around Slieve
Gullion, Redmond O'Hanlon packed a
blunderbuss and took to the highway.
As captain of a little squad of outlaws,
and with a tempting reward on his
head, he led the Planters of Armagh,
Down, Tyrone and Monaghan a lively
dance for fully twenty years, giving
'' their roofs to the flame and their
flesh to the eagle '' when the chance
offered. They got him in the end and
spiked his gory head on the portals of
Downpatrick Jail. But that is another
story.[note: *See The Highwayman in Irish History, (Gill
& Son)]   For my own people it was a
struggle all the time to wring a living
from unyielding soil and to rear a goodly
family, of which I was the youngest,
the only boy, and the least useful about
the place . It stings my conscience now
to think that often when help was needed
in the fields, I was day-dreaming elsewhere.
If my father and mother were in many
ways stricter than parents of to-day, they
were always just and considerate. They
must have observed early that I had
neither taste nor talent for farm work, for
after school hours I was given the freedom
of the friendly hills with a dog and a book
for company. I loved the solitude of those
airy heights and the brooding stillness,
broken only by singing birds or the
drumming of a snipe or the lonesome cry
of a peewit.
Curious the effect that early environment leaves upon some natures. Even
now, after more than forty years of stuffy
bondage in town and city, a glimpse of
distant hilltops can send my spirit soaring
with a sense of liberation and delight
such as all the gold of Darner could
not buy.
Though distance shuts the gate of song,
I hold thereof the key,
And hear the warblers still among
The hills of memory.
My mother was all heart ; never happier
than when sharing what she had with
somebody or anybody. Old women of the
roads and poor pedlars from God knows
where could always rely on her for a bowl
of strong t ea or a shake-down for the
night if the weather was bad. One poor
woman I remember in particular was a
gentle soul who went by the name of
Mary the Missioner. It was known that
she set apart portion of the alms she got
on her rounds to have Masses said for
the Holy Souls. She used call at our
house three or four times a year, sometimes staying for the night. Once, however, a whole year passed without a visit
from her and we thought that Mary the
Missioner had gone to join the Holy Souls.
But she had not. What happened was
that she had made a pilgrimage across
Ireland on foot, 300 miles there and
back, to Our Lady's shrine at Knock,
then of fairly recent origin.
And that reminds me of Old Molshie,
a neighbour I knew who, in her younger
days, had walked all the way from Lislea
to Lough Derg in three successive years
to make the pilgrimage there. There
would be a party of them, and on the
long trail across Ulster and back they
subsisted on an iron ration of oaten bread
and spring water.
I had two bachelor uncles, brothers to
my mother, who lived with their cat at
the foot of a ferny glen a mile away. In
their prime each had loved and lost, and
never loved nor thought of marrying
after. But the disappointment left no
tinge of gall in the blood of either. Never
have I known a happier, simpler, kindlier
or more contented pair. They lived to be
very old, yet remained young at heart as
schoolboys till the end. Both had the
gift of story-telling and a store of old
fireside tales of wonder. Finn MacCool
was their hero . One of my earliest memories is of a day they brought me far up
the glen behind their home to see the
jackstones Finn had played with when
a boy. These were five isolated boulders,
each the size of a house.
In the same glen was a spring well
overhung by sloe and hazel bushes. Here
one early morning at the time of the
Great Famine their mother caught a
leprechaun dozing under the bushes, or so
they often told. Gripping the little fellow
by the shoulders she threatened to keep
him prisoner in a chest at home until
he had revealed where his treasure was
hidden. The leprechaun laughed. He had
no treasure of his own and no knowledge
of where any treasure was hidden . But
seeing that she had him captive, he would
promise to do her a great service if she
set him free. He would give his bond
that as long as famine lasted in the country
neither she nor her people would ever
want for food. She gave him his freedom, 
and the leprechaun kept his word. When
supplies ran dangerously low they were
always mysteriously replenished.
In a large holly bush at the end of their
garden generations of blackbirds continued to nest and hatch their young. My
uncles always kept a bantam hen and
cock as curiosities. One of their bantam
chicks developed into an ornithological
freak. When fully grown it would crow
like a cock at sunrise and whistle fluty
notes like a blackbird at roosting time.
Could you beat that ?
My schooling began and ended at
Lislea national school- apart from, let
us say, a post-graduate course in Pitman's
shorthand, then considered an odd subject for a country boy. My first teacher
was closely related to the family of Donn
Byrne, the novelist. He was a remarkable
man, the type of character Carleton would
have eagerly portrayed. Had Master
McFarland lived in an earlier generation,
without doubt he would have been a
hedge-schoolmaster, an outlaw for the
sake of learning. Teaching boys was as
the breath of his nostrils, the ruling
passion of a long and laborious life. When
in the end the weight of years and sore
feet forced him into retirement, he broke
his heart and died. His last wish was
that his grave might be dug close to the
back wall of the school, that he might
still hear the boys at their lessons. The
schoolhouse stood at one end of the little
churchyard, and his wish was granted.
He was a terribly cross master. A
stranger passing by during school hours
might have thought that a clog dance was
going on within, so steady was the
rhythm with which his ferule fell upon
the hands and legs of the class he was
teaching. When the mood was on him,
down came his rod of mountain ash on
dull boy and bright boy alike.
His method of teaching hygiene was
direct, drastic and effective. On frequent
but unknown days after roll-call he would
line up all the boys in a Jong row, their
backs to the wall, and with a jar of water
in his hand would pass down the line,
making careful scrutiny of each pupil.
Any fellow who had not washed his face,
ears, neck and hands thoroughly that
morning got a cold douch from the jar
down his back.
By the time I came under his iron rule
his teaching days were nearly over.
Although bowed with age he was still
fierce looking. Toothless and bald, save
for two shaggy wisps of hair standing out
at right angles to his ears, he had eyebrows that were long and heathery.
While his upper lip and lean jaws were
shaven, there shot from his strong chin a
rebellious bunch of beard to complete the
fearsome effect.
For nearly fifty years this devoted
teacher had travelled each morning on
foot up three miles of hilly road from his
home at Camlough to the school at
Lislea, and back again in the evening;
yet never seemed to eat a lunch . At
play-hour he would draw from the recesses of his swallow-tail coat a cutty pipe
and a plug of strong tobacco. Then
and then only would those stern features
relax a little as he wreathed himself in a
rancid cloud of smoke.
His reputation as a teacher, especially
of higher mathematics, was such that
grown boys from neighbouring parishes
came over the hills to finish their schooling
at his hands. One of my last recollections
of him is as vivid now as though it were
of yesterday. It was a murky evening
late in the year. School was finished for
the day. In the gathering twilight the
old master, with a little group of senior
boys going in his direction, had started
silently for home. Some problem they
had been working on earlier in the day
had eluded solution. Presently the master
stops abruptly and, tracing a diagram 
with the point of his umbrella on the
muddy road, exclaims : " Boys, I have
it ! " Had it been a crock of gold he
found, he could not have seemed better
pleased.
The old master was succeeded by a
gentler spirit, kinsman and namesake of
the present Bishop of Clogher, the Most
Rev. Dr. Eugene O'Callaghan. He was
more to my liking. Besides upholding the
tradition of the school in the realm of
mathematics, he had a flair for the right
use of words, as well as for the best
examples of prose and poetry that the
higher reading-books of that period provided. And the best of those old reading books was very good indeed: elegant extracts from Shakespeare, Milton, Dryden,
Pope, Swift, Steele, Addison, Burke,
Johnson, Goldsmith, Gray, Scott, Byron,
Shelley, Keats, Macaulay and the rest.
Nor was the new master satisfied when
we had learned by heart all the lyrics and
long narrative poems; as time went on
another part of our homework was to
memorise classic pieces of prose so as to
be able to repeat them without the book
next day. Most of the boys were in
revolt against this innovation, but for the
few who found it a pleasure, it afforded a
fine literary groundwork to build upon.
In later boyhood I had the happy fortune to come into friendly contact with
an ancient mariner who had ploughed
the seven seas in a windjammer, and was
blessed with a merry heart, a droll mind
and a constant twinkle in his dark eye.
He was Captain O'Hagan of Omeath,
the son and grandson of seafarers, born
with the salt water in his veins. Having
docked his ship for the last time, he
would often visit his sister who owned
the Mountain House Inn, an old-time
tavern, at the crossroads near my home.
He was great company, sitting there
under a tree with his jug of ale and his
pipe, yarning away about the strange
sights he had seen and odd people he had
known. A gluttonous reader of romantic
fiction besides, he seemed to remember
the plot and characters of any good story
he had ever read. Scott, Stevenson, Clark
Russell, and Mark Twain were his
favourite authors, and it was to him I
owed my early introduction to these and
other masters of the gripping tale.
He used tell a good one about a Scotsman he knew who had a second-hand
bookshop in Derry. Having bought a
bankrupt's stock of several hundred
copies of the Protestant bible, the bookseller cleared his window to make a
special display of his purchase, marking
the price at 2/9 a copy. But the demand
was not so good as expected. Fearing
he would be left with most of the bibles
on his hands, he had a placard hung
outside the door, with a printed finger
pointing to the stack of bibles in the
window. Underneath the pointing finger,
in flaming type, ran lines something like
these:
Holy Bible, book divine,
Very cheap at two-and-nine
Satan trembles when he sees
Bibles sold as cheap as these .
Once when his ship was bound from
the Mersey to South America, Captain
O'Hagan found himself with a crew who
were mostly Chinese. Anxious to put
them in good heart at the outset of the
voyage, he had them served the first day
at sea with a glorious feast of stuffed
rabbit and bacon. Later he asked one of
them how he had enjoyed the dinner.
" Velly much, sir ; velly much indeed,"
said the Chinaman. And then to himself : " Piecee pussy velly nicee."

Still older than old Master McFarland,
and even more remarkable in his way, was
Padna McGivern, who tilled a little farm
below the schoolhouse. He too was an 
ardent scholar, but his tastes were in
obscure byways of the buried past. An
old dresser in the kitchen was crammed
with books. Most of these were leather-bound and may have been valuable.
Some were devotional works in Irish,
survivals perhaps from the penal days,
when such books were printed on the
Continent, smuggled home and stealthily
circulated.
Old Padna lived largely within himself, aloof and detached from his time,
'' voyaging through strange seas of
thought, alone." He was a bit eccentric,
especially in dress. Hail, rain or sunshine,
he wore the same long, dark, threadbare
coat, the same white cravat and the same
tall silk hat, now dinged and lustreless.
He would call occasionally at the sacristy
door before Mass on Sundays to inquire
if it would be convenient for the priest
to hear his confession. Once when a
strange priest, doing temporary duty in
the parish, came to say Mass, Padna had
a further inquiry to make : whether his
reverence would pref er that he should
confess in Irish, Latin or English. One
up for Lislea !
Before my time Padna, kneeling near
the altar rails, would give the responses
to the Rosary during October devotions.
One evening the priest, unaware that
Padna had not yet arrived, began:
" Thou, O Lord, wilt open my lips."
No response, beyond the inarticulate
drone of the congregation. Then silence,
and again: "Thou, O Lord, wilt open
my lips." Still no reply from Padna.
" Where are you, Padna ? " calls the
priest testily. " I am coming, Father,
and my tongue shall announce Thy
praise," answers Padna, hurrying up
the aisle.
Over the fields from Padna's place
lived alone an old widow named Sally
Humphreys. She too spoke Irish fluently
and had a rich store of folk songs and
traditions. The house she lived in stood
on the actual site of the hut that had
served as a hiding-place for Doctor
Donnelly, Bishop of Dromore, in the
penal days. A rude cabin in a nearby
clump of trees was his chapel. In the
odd name of the townland-Doctor's
Quarters-this link with the battle for
the Faith in Ireland is still commemorated.
As well as I remember it was from old
Sally that the late Father Laurence
Murray, of scholarly fame and cherished
memory, heard an interesting thing.
Bishop Donnelly, as is commonly known,
was for a considerable period during the
cruel reign of Queen Anne the only
Catholic Bishop in the North. Disguised
as a wandering minstrel, he would travel
on foot from town to town to guide,
console, exhort and strengthen his outlawed priests and hapless people. The
password by which the faithful recognised him was the name and title he had
assumed of Felim Brady, the Bard of
Armagh. When Father Murray repeated for
old Sally the doggerel lines of the familiar
ballad of that name, she was very indignant. Though unable to recall more
than a fugitive snatch of it, she had a
clear recollection of an Ulster Gaelic
folk-song with the same theme being
sung in her girlhood to the same lovely
old air. In comparison she thought the
modern ballad in English a poor, unworthy and senseless imitation.
Bishop Donnelly was a Tyrone man,
educated by the Jesuits in their hedge-school at Drogheda, and ordained by
Blessed Oliver Plunket. When he was
called to his reward in 1716, the people
carried his coffin by night from parish to
parish across the hills of Armagh and
Tyrone, and laid him to rest in his own
family burial-ground at Desertcreaght,
near Cookstown.
Ballymoyer, the name of another townland some distance from Doctor's
Quarters, has historical associations of a 
different kind. It was part of the patrimony of the MacMoyres, hereditary
keepers of the Book of Armagh. It is
familiar history that the last keeper, a
schoolmaster named Florence MacMoyre,
pawned the sacred volume for a fivepound note in 1680, immediately before
proceeding to London to bear false witness
against Oliver Plunket. In the course of
time he returned to Ballymoyer, and died
there shortly before the death of the Bard
of Armagh.
This unfortunate man was buried in the
old churchyard of Ballymoyer, but the
location of his grave is unknown. Owing
to the abhorrence in which his memory
was held by the people, his tombstone was
uprooted and broken long, long ago.
It is a curious fact that the name of
MacMoyre, common in the locality until
the martyrdom of Blessed Oliver, has
entirely disappeared. There is a tradition
that those who bore it then had the grace
and decency to change it to McGuire.
Another local tradition, or rather a wild
wisp of folklore, has it that the Pope of
Rome curses the memory of Florence
MacMoyre once Every year !

Meanwhile, what of the young curate
in Lower Killeavy and of the circumstances in which he put my foot on the
ladder of journalism ? Within a year or
two of his arrival Father Lyons had
already wrought an economic transformation in our end of the parish. He taught
the local farmers a new and better way of
life, and put Lislea on the Co-operative
map. Through his inspiration and drive
a creamery, an egg-station and a land-bank came into being as if by magic,
opening up vistas of a modest prosperity
for the people. In those days, too, Irish
was still the spoken tongue of many of
the older folk around; under his encouraging influence and example its study
in the schools and at weekly classes of the
Gaelic League became an absorbing
interest of the rising generation.
Here let me digress a little to recall
that it was as a student of Irish and an
unbeaten champion at feiseana from the
Glens of Antrim to the Boyne, that
Donn Byrne revealed at that time an
inkling of the surpassing literary talent
which later on was to carry him at a
bound to the front rank of romantic
novelists of his day. Our Irish teacher
was a retired schoolmaster, a native
speaker from a neighbouring parish. But
it was from old people in the foothills of
Slieve Gullion that Donn Byrne gathered
the wonderful store of Gaelic folk-tales
and ranns and idioms that enabled him
to outstrip all comers in open competition.
He had a nimble wit and colossal self-confidence, and was never backward
about arguing the toss with adjudicators
on matters of folklore and poetry. He was
bilingual in the best sense, speaking Irish
or English as occasion arose, and speaking both with equal fluency. When in
time he passed to study for a degree in
Romance languages at U.C.D., one of his
professors chanced to be Dr. Douglas
Hyde. Dr. Hyde said of him that he was
the only student of his from the North-east who knew colloquial Irish.
His real name, by the way, was Brian
O'Byrne, not Donn Byrne. Being brown-haired and brown-eyed, he hit on the
plan, when entering the lists at a feis,
of sending in his name as Brian Donn
O'Byrne, to distinguish himself from other
O'Byrne competitiors. It was only after
emigrating to New York that he dropped
the Brian and the Irish O to flare into
literary fame as Donn Byrne.
It is noteworthy also that his best
stories were hewn from the living rock
of Gaelic tradition. Messer Marco Polo - the first of his books to be published on
this side of the Atlantic-would, for
instance, probably never have been written but for his earlier interest in the 
language movement at home. When
working for his degree he came upon an
old manuscript containing the story of
Marco Polo, written by a Genoese friar.
This recalled to his mind a somewhat
similar Gaelic folk-tale he had heard in
the hills of South Armagh. His first
impulse was to make it the theme of an
epic poem. But he changed his mind and
fashioned from it instead the great
romance upon which alone his reputation
as a novelist rests secure.
When news went out that Father
Lyons was being transferred to the other
end of the parish there was keen sorrow
in the countryside, as old and young had
grown to regard him with feelings of
affection. Hitherto he had lived at Camlough, where the sound of an Orange
drum was never heard, except when the
wind was blowing from the direction of
Bessbrook, where the brethren had their
nearest stronghold. And now he was
going to Bessbrook to share house with
another curate, the present Dean of
Armagh, the Right Rev. Monsignor
McDonald, P.P., V.G., Dungannon.
By this time I had finished school and
was at a dead end. My name had gone
up to the Board of National Education for
appointment as junior teacher, but was
turned down because the average attendance at Lislea school was below the
required figure of 40. It was only 39-
three-fifths- a narrow escape from a
career I had no taste for. With no
definite purpose in view I took up the
study of shorthand at home, but found it
heavy going on my own. It was here,
and not for the first or last time, that
Father Lyons turned up trumps. If my
parents were agreeable and I was willing
to come with him to Bessbrook and help
in the housekeeping there, I could join
a shorthand class in the neighbouring
town of Newry and, striving hard, hope
for the best. This was into my lap. And
so it came to pass that, with a heart as
light as Huckleberry Finn's, I was hitting
the road for Bessbrook before the end of
the week; setting out to push my fortune.
The life I had in the presbytery at
Bessbrook was too good to last. I must
have sensed this at the time, for I made
the most of my chance and, under the
eye of a good tutor, passed rapidly from
theory to practice in shorthand, and
thence to what was called reporting
style and speed. Reporting ! What would
I not give to be a reporter.
. I can still recapture a share of the
thrill I felt the day my eye fell on a note
in the Dundalk Democrat, saying there
was a vacancy for a junior reporter on the
staff of that paper. What a hope, however ! Not for an eager youth from the
back of beyond was such an opening
intended. Anyhow I would tell Father
Lyons about it.
And that was how the priest who is now .
Lord Bishop of Kilmore came to call at
the Democrat office, Earl St., Dundalk,
and whisper something into the Editor's
ear .... 
