A land without produce or thing of worth of any kind! A land without dry weather, without a stream, without a star! [note: “Tír gan tartha gan tairbhe I nÉirinn! Tír gan turabh gan buinne gan réiltean!”] -Egan O'Rahilly. 
In Autumn the red and brown of the mountains and trees colour the cooling air. You can leave Killarney behind you, walk along the road with the grey wall that hides the beauties of Muckross on your right hand, and the moving shoulder of Tore above you on the left, up and up until everything touristed and ticketed is below in the deep valley, until you feel the colour of the mountains soaking into your eyes, your hair, the fragile fabric of skin, until the silence of the high places has seeped into your soul. Then, if you are that sort of person, you can sit down and listen, positively listen to the advance of winter, over and around 
the mountains, through the high passes, up deep glens as remote as Midrans in the Tyrol where a modern novelist pieced together the terrible story of the miracle boy and the black, mysterious raven. The secret of winter is in these places: the cold, rigid secret blasting and withering all growing green things, stilling the dance and sparkle of lakewater, driving colour and laughter from little fields to shelter in lonely farmhouses until the spell lifts and the sun returns. The secret of the winter of the spirit of man -is there in some subtle, elusive allegory, drawn in symbols of high hills, cold winds, withering foliage, desolate swamped fields, lonely homesteads, in mists that filter down through every deep glen, through Glenflesk and around the ruined castle of Killaha, over the bare slope of Scrahanaveal, where a poet was born, over the flat sea-sand beyond Castlemaine where the poet listened to the thunder of the great wave and knew that he and his people were among the most desolate of all men. The mists gather and the leaves fall. The last few lingering tourists, as valiant and as melancholy as the last few lingering leaves, circle obediently on the Ring of Kerry, down the Laune to Killorglin, up the steep street, out over level moorland until the great stretch of Dingle Bay is visible from the high road under the shadow of Drung Hill. The iron discipline of the tour may relax, allowing these last valiant trippers to pray in the church in Cahirciveen that grateful men built to honour God and as a memorial to the great O'Connell, allowing them to look across at Valencia Island from the harbour on the mainland, or down into the clear water below the harbour wall, at the silver mackerel abandoned between the boats and the salted, iced, packingcases, to the vicious, crawling crabs. The poet who was born on the slope of Scrahanaveal mentioned that island in one of his stiff, melodious lamentations, bewailing the Domhnall MacCarthy More that an English queen had made Earl of Clancare and Baron of Valentia. "Dairinis in the west-it has no lord of the noble race, Woe is me! in Hamburg is the lord of the gentle merry heroes."[note: Dairinis thiar iarla ní’l aici ‘en chloinn úir, i Hamburg, mo chiach! Iarla na seabhac síodhach súbhach; Seana-rosc liath ag dian ghol fá cheachtar dhíobh súd fá ndeara dham trial riamh ort, a Bhailintín Bhrún.”] Only a few of the tourists will be interested in those lines or in the memory of that lamentation, or in the fact that another poet of those places stood, more than a century ago, on the height of Coomakesta Pass to sing a Gaelic salutation for the return of the Liberator to the great house at Derrynane, crying out that the great Dan carried his shield before the broken, tattered, barefooted thousands, describing this new democracy in the terms that proud, foolish poets had reserved for eulogies of the wandering Stuarts, crying out that the Hanoverian crown would go down to the dust. These things are memories moving vaguely in mist; and tourists, as a rule, are sensible people who belong to the sun and the untroubled sky. Bending before the iron will of Killarney hotel-porters the tourists jolt on sidecars through the Muckross estate, hear jokes and fables prepared for their predecessors in the dawn of tourism, pay their money and view the lakes, pay more money and view the Tore waterfall. The same sidecars, the same jarveys, ponies, and a similar strain of anecdote carry them up the gloomy Gap of Dunloe, abandon them to boats and boatmen and the cool enchantment of the lakes, the excitement of the rapids, the landing under the shadow of Ross Castle. More money and they may climb the tower, uncomfortably conscious of the chill in the wind, the lack of summer light in the wide tossing water, on the great walls of the 
mountains. When the last echo of their steps has gone from the dull walls and the twisting stairway, the darkness, . the mists from lake and mountain can thicken around the castle; darkness, grey mist, grey stone, restless water, lulling and deluding the mind, making every noise the rattle of a horsehoof, the slap of a scabbard, every glimmer of lost light on a stone or a wet leaf like the abrupt flash of steel. The wooded places by the lake might be alive with men, presences that have never left the place, Ludlow's Cromwellians who closed around and captured this castle, trampled on this soil and on these stones, trampled also on a separate civilisation, a distinct way of life. When they rode down towards that lakeshore and saw before them the grey walls of that castle it was the beginning of a winter that was to last for more than a hundred years. 
2 In the first bite of the wind of that winter Aodhagan O'Rahilly, the poet from Scrahanaveal composed his poems: long, stately elegies that litanied the praises of some dead man and the line of gentry to which he belonged, connected the family of this or that castle in southwestern Ireland with Greece or Rome or ancient Ireland or Adam in the garden; ·mirrored the past of his own country both by the actual historical facts imbedded in his elegies and by their revelation of that incredible pride of ancestry that could make a poet glory not in his poetry but in his inherited allegiance to a princely family. In the small area of Munster in which he lived his life to its miserable end there was more material for poetry than the fruit that died or dropped off the family-trees of the gentry, or the classical connections of Gaelic genealogy; and because O'Rahilly really was a very great poet he was aware of the existence of that material, and used it exquisitely in lyric and lament. The mountains, the glens, the wooded places, the windy lakes, are visible through the careful melodious lines of a handful of those visionary lyrics. If you quote them quietly to yourself anywhere within ten miles of the town of Killarney you will know immediately that this man understood and interpreted the spirit of the place. He was not by any means a landscape poet. He did not write reliable, detailed accounts of the lives of the common people. Even the descriptions he has given of castle-interiors can be as far from social documentary as any fanciful effort of the imagination ever was. But his intuitive power caught in a few sudden lines all the secret of the water, the woods, the great mountains, the beauty of the world and its sorrow, the sunny calm places, the crushing rush of storm; and somehow he has written into all that his own misery, the misery of his people, the horror of his time contrasted with the past as he had imagined it. The man who has once perfectly expressed the spirit of any place is always alive in that place. The local people may forget that he ever existed. The spot where his body was put in the ground may be forgotten. No man in all the land may name him among his ancestors. The words that he wrote may be read only by a very few. But at some time or other men reading these words will understand that he and he only gave perfect voice to the beauty that had previously impressed in silence, that he said the words that described exactly the silences and the wordless sounds, the lights, the shadows, the differing colours. O'Rahilly's handful of lyrics did all that for the country around Killarney. Down by the lake or under the branches or on the high mountainy roads a man can understand what he meant when he cried out that the brightness of brightness had met him in his lonely path. Actually from the top of some high hill above Killarney Aodhagan must have conjured up that vision of Aoibhill and her charming, playful maidens lighting candles on Gnoc Firinne in Limerick, illuminating all the harbours of Ireland to welcome back a king. The vision and the light were transient. The king never returned. The harbours and the shore and the sea were hidden in darkness out of which the poet cried against the desolate wave, its discordant clamour, its mournful thundering. That was down by Ross heigh and Castlemaine 
Harbour, a cycle-run from Killarney. His life,. his misery, his genius are bound up completely with that confined tract of country, with Rossbeigh, Glenflesk, Rathmore, ·stagmount, Killaha, Killeen. Tradition allows him a journey over the mountains to the town of Cork, to Ballyvourney to a school of the poets. Commonsense must allow him occasional excursions to the great houses of the men he eulogised, over whom he preached the conventional poetic panegyric. Compared with Eoghan Rua OSUilleabh:iin, the rake, the wastrel, the schoolmaster, .spalpeen, soldier, sailor, poet from Meentogues which is next-door to Scrahanaveal, O'Rahilly was an untravelled man. His life was confined to a few townlands where his very nature made it inevitable that the popular traditions concerning him should be few, nebulous, contradictory. To-day in Killarney town it is possible to find men who, in common with the majority of their fellow countrymen, have lost touch with the poetry of the ragged men from Sliabh Luachra, with the language in which that poetry was written. But most of those men could tell some story about Eoghan the wanderer, while even the scholars and the folklorists are troubled to put together the scattered pieces of the story of the man who stayed at home. To discover the truth behind that paradox is not very difficult. But to try to discover the presence of the poet in those townlands is as wearisome and aggravating as elbowing one's way through milling, trampling, shouting crowds, looking for one lost and scarcely recognisable human being. The past and the present come together confusedly in that one particular crowd in which this poet has been lost; the people of Killarney, Kerry, Cork, of all Ireland; the visitors who have gone to that place to look at the scenery, to play golf, to fish; the shawled women in the queue outside the cinema in Killarney; the jarveys with the stereotyped jokes. Only an ingenious specimen of screen-montage could do justice to the ironic complications and contradictions of that crowd. Alfred Lord Tennyson sits to write his poem, and the bugles obediently blow. Pugin supervises the building of a cathedral.  
The author of the Waverley novels pays a platitudinous compliment to the beauty of the Upper Lake and writers of guidebooks go on transcribing it to the end of time. Lord Macaulay and Thackeray follow up with appropriate platitudes. Wordsworth and Alfred Austin go striding with faces of doom before generations of tourists. A noted film-star praises the lakes and the police-force in identical terms. Charles James Fox goes swimming round the Devil's Punch Bowl; and in the same circular motion, as regular as the nitrogen cycle, the lesser tourists condemned to read and repeat the remarks made by the more notable tourists, go up the Gap and down the lakes, up the estate and down the road below Tore, round and round and round, whirling faster and faster, encircling the bewildered shade of the man who really was the poet of the place, to whose voice the echoes replied. 
3 In 1653 the Cromwellian men hanged Piaras Ferriter, in Killarney town, on a hill called the Hill of the Sheep. They hanged a gentleman and a gallant soldier which was nothing out of character for Cromwellians. They killed a poet who was great enough to lament the misery that the wars had brought on his people, rich and poor, in a line that recalls the great thought from Donne used, or misused, by Ernest Hemingway: "Is biogdhghadh báis liom bás mo chómharsan." His death was symbolical, like the smashing of statues or stained glass, and the corpse of a gentleman-poet of the Gaelic order swinging in the wind on a gallows is a fitting introduction to two centuries in which gentlemen and poets of the Gaelic order were to wither from the face of the earth. His death makes the town of Killarney of supreme importance in the story of those two centuries. On the Hill of the Sheep to-day, since the power of the Cromwellians is only a very bitter memory, there is a Franciscan friary. The road to Mallow town comes up the slope out of the little streets of Killarney. Across the road from the friary a statue stands in memory of the four great Kerry poets; behind the 
patch of green ground on which the statue stands is the perpetual steaming and shunting, departures and arrivals, of a railway station; beyond the station a cinema, an hotel, a Protestant church, a shop for curios and souvenirs, the new townhall, the office for the agent of the Kenmare Estate. Then the walled estate goes down to the edge of the water and beyond that there are only the mountains. That is one cross-section of Killarney and it leaves out much of what is of supreme importance in the modern town: the cathedral, the colleges and convents, the shops and the streets, the little lanes not unlike the lanes of Kilkenny, except in so far as they have failed to preserve the very whispering and gossip of the past. But that cross-section cuts not only through the town of the present-day but through two centuries of the story of the place. In the quietness of the byway that goes round the grey wall that delimits the grounds of the friary, the soft earth dotted with fallen leaves of Spanish chestnut, an imaginative visitor could feel the past coming painfully to life: the poet on the gallows, the solemn troopers "bibles in their boots," the cowed and scattered people. An old man digging potatoes in a garden beyond the hedge on the other side of the byway might symbolise O Bruadair, or wandering Eoghan, or Aodhagan himself, bitterly turning the heavy brown soil. But to-day the man at work is sheltered from the wind by the friendly wall of the friary. O'Rahilly the poet was overshadowed and shut out by the towering wall of the estate. It is not now too easy to realise how tall and terrifying the estate-wall must have appeared, for its real height was in the suggestion that it made to the spirit. O'Rahilly may never have laid eyes on the wall that goes out from Killarney town, past the cathedral, along the road to Killorglin. He may never have been greatly grieved by the fact that the people had been shut out from the lives of their lords and owners of their land except in so far as the people could be of use to the lords. But it was bitterness and forever bitterness to know that the new lords had no use for poets, that only the despised and rejected people still treasured and remembered the things that the Gaelic poet had to give. For us it is not easy to assess in our own standards the value of the order that the poet lamented, the civic or real social importance that belonged to the men of that order. The great castle of the O'Donoghue who lived by the lake, the tall castle of the O'Donoghue who lived in the glen, the halls of the O' Mahonys and the MacCarthys are cold ruins, well preserved or poorly preserved. But O'Rahilly found much to lament in the passing of that order. To-day the wall of the estate that is associated with the name of Valentine Brown is no great barrier against anything, least of all against tourism, which is among the most democratic of human institutions. When the family is not at home sixpence at the gate will open to you the beauty of the flat green places by the margin of Loch Lein, and you get the feeling that if your accent had been genuine Killarney nobody would have bothered to ask for the sixpence. You can see the long house where the present representative of the family of Valentine Brown lives. That particular house was once a stables but when the great mansion was accidentally burned down in the early years of this century efficient emergency measures converted the stables into a dwelling-place for a lord. You can see the burned-out body of the great mansion with its splendid view over flat grass and woods and lakewater. Across the flat grass a path twists, crosses a small stream, forks right to Reen Point and left to Ross Castle, names that come together in some obscure connection when we think of the poet's death-bed lament: 
"The hero of the Rinn, of Kill, and of the land of Eoghanacht
Wasted is his strength by want and injustice! The hawk who possesses all these and their rentals 
Does not give favour to a man though he be his kinsman." [note: Goll na Rille, na Cille, agus críche Eoghanacht, Do lom a ghoile le huireasbhaidh ar díth córa, An seabhach ‘g a bhfuilid sin uile is a gcíosóireacht, Fabhar ní thugann don duine, cé gaol dó-san.]
The hero may have been Eoghanacht O'Donoghue. The hawk was in all probability the Valentine Brown, the inaccessibility of whose purse had already been bewailed by the poet. Walking around the shell of the old mansion or over the flat ground to the lake a man can realise how dead the hero is, how the hawk has passed off into the blue air, and with them has gone all the passion and agony of that time of complicated transition. Personally I saw there only the quiet grazing cattle, a few men sawing wood, two barefooted boys with a tiny handcart. 
4 When I go to see an state-agent I hopefully expect to come up against something like Carleton's Valentine M'Clutchy, and naturally in these blessedly civilised days, almost half-a-century after the final collapse of the old system of land-tenure, that childishly morbid expectation meets inevitably with disappointment. A polite secretary introduced me into the office of the present agent of the Kenmare estate, an affable man, a polite man patient with an intruder, a scholarly man interested in the past of the Kenmare family, interested in any connection that might have existed between the members of that family and this voice from the lost Gaelic civilisation. The bulk of the Kenmare papers have already been edited by a scholar and there is in them little or nothing to throw light on the life of the poet. So our talk was on incidentals and generalities: about Reen townland that had once been mostly bogland, had been drained and cut away. Farms on the estate had at one time been let on condition that the tenant should build a good slated house and assist at the draining of bogland.. How many heroes of the Reen had toiled unsung at that job of drainage? The agent, Mr. Roulston, himself lived in that townland: we talked of the middlemen who had kept their own separate records with the result that many details about tenants had been lost. We discussed Murtagh Griffin who drew from O'Rahilly the type of blasting and withering abuse that the world associates with the name of Rabelais, except that in O'Rahilly's weird elegy on that turncoat and ruffian, there is a note of sharp and intimate bitterness that is not to be found in Pantagruel. 
"For ever, O rude stone, bind down with zeal The wandering rake by whom the country has been woefully despoiled; Lest he might return to us suddenly from Acheron, Press the villain tightly, bruise his heart." [note: “Go bráth, a gharbhleac, ceangail le dúthracht síos
An fánach fleascaigh ler creachadh go dubhach an tír; 
I gcás go bpreabfadh ó Acheron chughainn aníos
Fáisc go faingion an Raille, agus brúigh a chroidhe.”] 
Yet the last will and testament of that same wandering rake records in all the conventional legal phrases such piety towards his Maker and genuine affection towards his beloved wife . . . well, perhaps, the bitter poet was mistaken. And mistaken or not, it is at least edifying to observe the sense of the fitness of things that legally bequeathed the soul to God, while the poor body, bound down zealously by the 'rude stone', awaited resurrection and judgment. • We discussed the conduct of the modern estate: a purely commercial business of managing property and involving no "gale-days." We talked of the scarred shell of the great nineteenth-century mansion. The family mansion had had other sites, one somewhere between the agent's office and the present-day house, but in none of those places had any traces been left. The Kenmares came originally from a spot seven or eight miles away on the road to Tralee, claiming their land both by conquest and by a mortgage over the MacCarthy M6r. I looked at the office-walls lined with finely-bound volumes rescued from the old mansion, wondered vaguely what the ragged and miserable poet would have done with the contents of those shelves, waited vaguely for the past to re-create itself. After all, he had been the one real incarnation of the spirit of the place. He had tramped to Cork city and there got himself a book, and if he were to be found at all in that place he would be found among books. But the typewriter click-clacking derisively in the outer office as I made my way to the street told me plainly what my own world and my own time would think of such imaginings. For the sun has risen over this country, and a lost poet may have liberty to wander on through the night that my own time would say he created out of his own dismal lamentations. His night was without hope. His land lacked even the cold light of the stars. We, walking in the sun, know our own minds, see with our own eyes our own familiar landmarks, leave desolation and unbelief to the other nations of the earth. That was why I didn't look for the lost poet in the townhall, a very elegant townhall, or in the busy little streets, or in the busy shops, or in the Presentation Convent, or in the cathedral. For the very existence of all these things, the tall beauty of the spire, the busy nuns in the schoolroom, are plainly visible evidence that the sun has risen, that the night without stars is only a very bitter memory. The descendants of Valentine Brown helped the nuns to make their home there in days when the energy and charity of the sisters was the one wall between the people and utter desolation. Today the desolation has passed, the children of the people learn their lace-making and miscellaneous lessons under the shadow of the spire that Pugin conceived. Across the road is the grey wall of the estate, the rattle of a small stream, the wind moving in the tops of tall trees. Trees standing erect, not felled to the ground as they were when the anonymous poet lamented the rape of the woods of Kilcash. Trees, strong and beautiful, a part of the sunrise and the brightening land. A Nation growing instead of felling trees is a nation that has at least taken the right road. O'Rahilly united Kilcash and Killarney in the beautiful epithalamium he wrote to celebrate the wedding of Valentine Brown, third Viscount Kenmare, to Honora Butler of Kilcash. That was in 1720. Ten years later the lady died of the smallpox. The poet lived to satirise the bridegroom. Yet not even those desolating facts take away from the biblical beauty of the verses: 
"The languid are becoming vigorous and the great hills are strong, In winter every tree puts forth blossoms, Since Kilcash has been united lovingly in bonds With the Prince of Killarney, our champion." [note: “Tá bíodhgadh I ngach tamhlag, is groidhechnuic go láidir,
‘san ngerimhreadh tig bláth ar gach bile;
Cill Chais ó thárlaidh i gcuibhreach go grádhmhar
Le Rígh Chille hAirne ár gcuradh. »] 
The man who saw the winter-trees put forth blossoms was at least temporarily capable of seeing the sun by day and the stars by night, but not incapable of foreseeing satire and smallpox and the woods bare and desolate. Past the convent and the cathedral the road runs to many places, to Dunloe, Killorglin and the Kerry Ring, Castlemaine and Aghadoe, to the thunder of the sea at Rossbeigh. It passes by the house of a man, [note: Mr. Joseph O'Connor] a retired inspector of schools, who has devoted his retirement to the examination of Gaelic manuscripts collected here and there in mountainy places in the course of a lifetime. Yellowing paper, beautiful elaborate handwriting done with effort in a noble attempt to preserve songs, stories, blessings, salutations, lore of the weather and of herbs, all the rich and intricate ideas whose creation and preservation give a divine courage to the souls of men. "Anything of O'Rahilly there"? "No, nothing. Not even another manuscript of something already discovered by Dinneen. That's the fate of the man who goes out of his way to follow the gentry. Stories about Eoghan Rua? Certainly, stories by the dozen." I had a vision of smoky hiding-places behind the hearth, cavities in the rafters, corners in a hundred dressers yielding up their golden secrets. "But there is a story about the last two descendants of Murtagh Griffin who held land at Lisnagawn-that's Headford-in Aodhagan's time. The last of that family were two single men, renowned for hard drinking and hard spending. One day in the market they spent their last penny, came home. In the house one of them struck a match to light his pipe, was chided by his brother for the wanton extrava-' gence that would waste a match while a fire burned on the hearth." I saw the match burn down in the fingers of one old man, heard the chiding of 1his brother, saw the flame die into the darkness in which Murtagh, who had once been administrator to Helen, the mother of Valentine Brown, willed his soul to God and Kilman and Kilmacudd to his "beloved wife, Jane Griffin als Archbold." In the same darkness the poet cursed him, saw him in a moment of fiendish imagination drifting helpless into the darkness of Styx. I left the man of the manuscripts and walked meditatively back to Killarney town. He wished me luck, even to the point of discovering the manuscript of a hitherto unknown poem of O'Rahilly. What greater joy could a scholar wish to his fellowman? 
5 In the hotel the commercials sitting around the fire discussed the world, the peoples and nations of the world, the universe, the life to come, the prospects of peace and improved business. The rain whipped at the tall windows. The hotel-porter said it would be foolish to venture out, smiled a resigned Kerry smile when his advice was disregarded. The road to Glenfesk and Killaha Castle went up into the cloudy mountains, up into the recurring rain, until the castle stood up tall and grey and overgrown with ivy overlooking the tops of the highest trees, the wet slopes of the valley, the Flesk river, swollen and thundering down towards Loch Léin. Under the shelter of that high grey wall poetry and learning had lived stubbornly for years after the fall of Ross Castle, for years after the calamitous transactions around the walls of Limerick. The rapparees sheltered the poets and the schools of the poets, for the rapparees and robbers and persons of the Romish religion included among their number the last representatives of an aristocratic order that may have had a thousand faults but did certainly reserve a fireside chair for the poet. It was possibly Domhnall O'Donoghue Dubh, father of Fineen O'Donoghue, who presented the poet with a pair of boots. O'Rahilly did not, like independent Samuel Johnson, fling from him the gift that implied his inability to stand erect in his own footwear. He accepted the boots. He possibly needed them more around Killarney than Johnson the student would have needed them for sliding on the ice in Christchurch meadow. And in return for the gift in leather he wrote an exquisite classical fantasy, lauding the beauty of the gift, the generosity of the giver, making the deserted walls of Killaha beautiful for ever to the man who loves the precious things of the mind. The leather had come from distant Barbary, transported over the sea by the fleet of Philip of Spain. The shoes would protect his feet on great hills and in rough meadows, in encounters with foemen. They would be an adornment in public places. Phoebus had loved the white cow whose hide had gone to their making. No rain would soften and no sun would harden the leather. The awl that pierced it was made of steel tempered for seven hundred years by demons with the craft of Vulcan. Darius, Alexander and Caesar had worn them, and Lir and Lughaidh; Bodhbh Dearg and Balar of blows, Osgar and Goll Mac Morna, Cuchulainn and Conall Cearnach, and Dunlaing had worn them on the field of Clontarf. Possibly that was only the conventional classicism of the period. John Milton assembled as many mythical personalities from the legends of Greece and Rome into his lament for the dead Lycidas. But the point is that this gift, the poem in praise of the gift and the giver, and some very essential part of Aodhagan O'Rahilly, · the poet, gathered around the high castle in that lonely glen and remained there for ever like a cloud of light or a vision made permanent. Maybe the poet was, as somebody suggested, trying to forget his own beggarly humiliation in this classical tap-dancing. , That would only add the essential pathos to a vision of the past that is at one and the same time always alive and utterly dead, gone, without power to return. The wind moved the desolate ivy. The rain fell steadily into the empty roofless ruin, into the small muddy space that must once have served as a sort 'of guardroom opening to the bottom of the spiral stairway and the entrance to the main hall of the castle. A few fragments of the staircase remained. The great main hall was a large muddy space with a wide fire-place and the wind whistling a boat the tall chimney. Under the shelter of the great ivy-grown walls was an enclosed garden. To the dwelling of the Flesk of the slender women the poet wished one and forty welcomes from a hundred druids to the flower of warriors, Fineen O'Donoghue of the Glen. Fineen came up that slope, up from the noise of the turbulent Flesk, up higher than the tops of the trees that grew in the valley, to something very different from those desolate walls and rain-sodden earth and that continuous whistle of wind about the high stones. Men to-day can argue bitterly enough as to what exactly Fineen did return to when the poet greeted him with that song of praise, and from modern bickerings we may at least understand that the poets possibly did a lot of their description in lavish technicolour .. Still it is also possible that a red hearth and a rush-covered floor, food and drink and the good company of men and women may have meant as much to a poet of that time as a Hollywood version of an Arabian tale may now mean to the shabby population of an industrial city. If O'Rahilly describing the hall of a patron wrote down magnificent things, whether or not they existed in reality they had real existence somewhere in his soul. His classic description is in the lines detailing the way of life at what had once been the home of O'Callaghan in Clonmeen: the musical, princely mansion,. the speckled silks and garments of satin, the whetting of swords, the warriors playing chess, the drinking of wines, the viands on spits, the music of harps, the reading of genealogies (which would hardly provide entertainment even for the most aristocratic modern), the blazing waxlights, fresh casks being opened for the multitude, horses racing, foot-soldiers contending, beer in goblets of wrought silver. With the exception of that single depressing little item about the public declamation of family-trees, we have there the elements of a very entertaining evening, and, since the O'Callaghans at Clonmeen had at one time controlled about fifty thousand acres of Munster, it is quite probable that the account contained little exaggeration. It is also more than probable that when all the fresh casks had been opened the multitude (would they have had any connection with the rude rabblement of Spenser's "Raskall many"?) did not return to electrically-heated semi-detached houses. O'Rahilly's own birthplace was no great distance away from the castle of Killaha, over the Flesk river, over the stream that is now known as the Quagmire. In all his poetry there is no hint as to what the house in which he first saw the light may" have resembled, no hint as to who or what his parents may have been except in the one proud cry that they and their parents and grandparents and ancestors back before the death of Christ were subject to the same chieftain. It was not the poetic convention to remember, remember the house where the poet was born, and it is only in Eoghan Rua's defence of bachelors or advertisement for setting up a school that we come on an intimate, localised note quite remote from the lamenting waves or the vocal rivers of, O'Rahilly or of Spenser. But O'Rahilly remembered and praised the great houses where he had had welcome and hospitality; and while his elegies and eulogies may have been written as obviously from poet to patron as much that came out of eighteenth-century Grub Street, it is obvious that the places were those houses stood we.re the only places where he ever saw the sun shine. He saw it shine here at Killaha Castle on the hill above the perpetual tumult of the river, and, in spite of the low sky and the rain and the empty walls, I could hear music and the sound of happy voices, the patter of that pair of magical boots, the chant of welcome greeting the return of Fineen, "from the home of the guilty, niggardly Saxons:'' The parochial house stands now on the same hill as that towering, significant ruin. I talked with a young priest who remembered from his college days only a few lines of the poet, but who from his own experience in living there confessed some respect for the strategic genius of the poet's patron, the chieftain of Killaha. A great place for a rapparee to live. Why, even today, when the river comes out on the road a force of infantry would have a nasty time tramping up from Killarney. What it was more than two hundred years ago any one who likes may imagine. I went on down the slope thinking of Aodhagán's connections with the clergy: the poem on the complaint of Aongus, the priest who bought a cock of high pedigree for the price of fifty shillings and had it stolen by a sprite of druidical power; the elegy on the death of Father John MacInery: "Withered is the fragrant lovely apple, Withered is the tree and blossoming plant, Withered is the gentle, fair, loving vine, Withered is the palm-bough from beauteous Paradise." [note: D’fheoigh an t-ubhall cumhra grádhmhar
D’fheoigh an crann ‘s an planda bláthmhar
D’fheoigh an fíonúir caoin, fionn, páirteach,
D’fheoigh géag phailime ó Pharrthas áluinn.”]
For the priests and the poets came together in the common misery that the long winter of the eighteenth century brought them. The most authoritative book on that particular aspect of that period mentions the number of notable men who were both priests and poets, mentions the words of sorrow spoken by a priest hearing of the death of the vagabond Eoghan. T [note: The Hidden Ireland. P.93.] On the way down I thought of these things, and irrelevantly of a wicked fragment from Aenghus O'Daly, employed by Sir George Carew in the opening years of the seventeenth century to lampoon the Irish chieftains. Men believed strongly then in the power of the poet and this particular poet saw in Glenflesk the crime of fratricide and the criminal niggardliness that would give a man nothing more intoxicating to drink than stale buttermilk. But as I looked back down the glen and up the slopes at the grey walls, the clouds were broken and a shaft of sunlight lay across Killaha, the ruined castle and the priests' house. I turned from the bribed bitterness of one poet to the lyrical gratitude of another. For whether O'Rahilly exaggerated or imagined or flattered, no· amount of debunking could disprove the truth that once on that high place there had been something of happiness and a great deal of security for a way of life that wars and robbery had driven backwards from fiat fertile places and from the neighbourhood of crowded towns. 
6 ·When I reached Lisnagawn the sunlight had gone and the clouds had closed in darkness over the comer of fiat land running abruptly to the roots of stiff, rocky hills. Tourists who go, not to Killarney but to Parknasilla, will be familiar with the place under the name of Headford. In the life of O'Rahilly and in the poems that he wrote, the name of Lisnagawn is alive with a sinewy hate that has defied and survived the centuries. It is not too easy to make out of the sparse and scattered details, left by the passing of more than two hundred years, a continuous narrative of the struggle that Eoghan, son of Connie MacCarthy Riabhach, made for the right to live at peace on that land. It happened in the opening decade of the eighteenth century and much of the complicated bitterness of the time is compressed into it, and expressed in a small way. It was not, by any means, a struggle in which the survivors of the old order battled against the more powerful invading forces of the new. The time cannot in that way be simplified into a clearly-marked design in black and white. But It can be said of that period as of all periods that wherever there was the possibility of profit, honest or dishonest, there also were tricksters and robbers and racketeers. The racket then was land. The land at Lisnagawn attracted Hussey and Griffin, the Griffin in question being one Edmond Griffin who lived at Killarney and was kinsman and executor to the notorious Murtagh. O'Rahilly's benison on the dead and departed Murtagh has already been mentioned. With Murtagh he connects Tadhg Dubh Cronin. O'Donovan mentions poor black Thady as an industrious farmer, and refers to O'Rahilly's tribute to his memory as 
an outrageous lampoon and, as in the case of the last will and testament of the bold Murtagh, it is not easy to reconcile O'Rahilly's abuse with the fair opinion put forward by enlightened scholarship. We can only say for certain that the enlightened scholarship of later days had no contact in the flesh with the men that the poet scarified for some persuasive reason of his own. Eoghan Maccarthy was banished after a scuffle that involved the death of two men, and the poet's lamentation over that banishment runs to two hundred and fifty lines of melodiously hard Gaelic. He gives to Owen the conventional virtues and ancestors that must have been among the stock-in-trade of the elegiac poets of his school, and then cries out: "It is pitiful that sheepmongers should have thy land, Which fell to them without payment, without an eiric; A portion of it under his elbow held by Muiris of the frieze, An unfortunate portion of it from Muiris held by Eamonn." [note: Is truagh do thalamh ag clanna na gcaorach,
Do ráinig eatortha I n-aiscidh gan éiric
Stéidhg fá n-a uilinn dé ag Muiris an bhréide,
Stéidhg na tubaiste ó Mhuiris de ag Éamonn. »]
One can never be quite sure whether to approve or deprecate the purpose of the poet's scorn for it is seldom quite certain whether he is whipping a rogue and a scoundrel or merely some poor man. But if it is possible to view scorn, with some artistic detachment, as a weapon used for a purpose, then there is no denying the merit of the variety in which O'Rahilly dealt. Sheepmongers and Cromwellians, dealers in frieze and jobbers in land, new gentry who didn't appreciate poets, merchants from Bristol and Dover who had sunk as low as slave-traffic; all kinds of new men, rich and poor, good and evil, came under the stiff lash of his verse. It may be that he merely knew what was good for himself. But it is also possible that he may have known very well what was good for his people. It is convenient to think of this defensive bitterness of his concentrated around that last green comer between the hard mountains and the small stream where, at a place now called Oldbridge, there was a tucking-mill, possibly the only machine mentioned in his poems. For in that obscure, half-forgotten dispute there was on one side a Maccarthy, and he had boasted that his forefathers had been under that name for more than two thousand years. On the other side were new men and exploiters, and behind them the soldiers of Cromwell and William and a code of penal law. From Killeen mountain, behind Lisnagawn and between the valley of the Owenreagh and the rounded summits of the Paps, his imagination traversed all Ireland in his elegy for Diarmaid O'Leary. Captain O'Leary had fought under James Stuart, possibly, according to Dinneen's note, in Boiselau's regiment of infantry, and the family of O'Leary in the land of I veleary from Macroom to Inchigeela and the long water of Lough Allua was for O'Rahilly one of the really significant things in God's universe. In the lamentation for O'Leary of Killeen he did, as I have said, survey all Ireland. He saw the Munstermen in sorrow, from Inis Finn to the royal house of Mor, from the shore of the Shannon to Leim Con Duibhe and to Baoi of the ships. He saw' the west making its moan, the mist on the meads and· the mountains, the sun weeping and the moon under a cloud. Now it may be just the mania of our time to blame O'Rahilly for not keeping his eyes open when he made one of these surveys of the unfortunate island on which he lived. That fine picture of women bewailing and children unborn bewailing the passing of a man to whom Diana gave a ring of gold, Mars a spear and Jupiter a suit of satin, who was kin to all the heroic blood of Erin back to Curi, Oscar and Conall, is as splendidly classical as a picture on an ancient vase. But it is not a picture of the Ireland in which Aodhagan O'Rahilly wrote his elegy or in which O'Leary of Killeen died; Ireland after the Boyne and Aughrim and Limerick, an Ireland spinning for a moment in the whirl of the marching and fighting of Europe, held for a moment like an object on a speeding disc, then pitched into darkness and putrid isolation. 
There is little point in blaming the poet for not writing about these things. If he had understood them down to the roots and if he had been able to intervene and check their course he would have had in him something of O'Connell, or Davis, or Mitchel from Ulster, or Davitt with the one arm. But he would not have been O'Rahilly, the last and possibly the greatest of the poets of a dying order, the last great eulogist of a system that is very much misunderstood both by those who colour it rose-red with glory and by those who see it as something from which we have, praised be God, escaped. Yet even if it may be unfair it is still very human to wish that O'Rahilly had really written not about genealogies or gifts from the gods or weeping rivers or lamenting waves but about the Ireland of the cabins on which his eyes opened in the place now called Stagmount. 
7 You see Stagmount to your left hand when you have passed the cross-roads at Barraduff on the road from Killarney to Rathmore; nothing so distinctive as a hill, a long smooth rise of land. The map colours it in brown and numbers it as 541 feet above sea-level which is not very much for Kerry. If you are a wise man you will continue along the road to Rathmore, past the convent and the children coming home from school and estimating all distances and directions by East and West, up to the long house on a windy hill where the Melleray monks made their first Irish home. (Down in Killarney the Presentation Nuns say that the monks walked from Rathmore to Killarney to build the wall around the Presentation convent, for which service the nuns provided some corporal sustenance and the benison of their prayers. A splendid sample of Christian co-operation.) The present resident of that long house is the parish priest of Rathmore, and a five minutes talk with him among his books would convince any man that O'Rahilly is nearer to Rathmore than to the fields of Stagmount. For the knowledge of Aodhagan, said the parish priest (and who could speak with more authority?) had gone early out of that valley when the road and the railway came and Gaelic died. Not quite dead though! There was still in the parish· where Dinneen the scholar had learned to love the language, in the district in which Aodhagan, the poet, had been born, one man who spoke Gaelic learned in the cradle. His name, of all names, was O'Leary and he lived.. At Gneeveguilla, where I found him a few hours later. Gneeveguilla is a very interesting place. The road that brings you there turns to the right-hand of the Rathmore-to-Killarney road, and it may be either of two straight ways made, once upon a time, by order of the Browns to give access to a stone-quarry. On one of those roads I overtook a man who was a butcher. He was also a next-door neighbour to Charles O'Leary of Gneeveguilla, a man, he said, that herding the cattle in fine weather had a book in his hand, a man that loved poetry and talking about poets. There was something vaguely familiar about that description, something heard somewhere or read in some book, and the irritating sense of half-recognition followed me up that road, in the wind and under the low sky and through the scattered little showers of cold rain, to the sloping field where I found Charles O'Leary keeping an eye on the cattle. He had no book. The day was not fine, and no lover of books would risk his library on that bare slope in broken weather. Below us in the valley was the Quagmire River (Abhainn Ui Chriadh); beyond the river, its higher outlines hidden in rainmist, was the district of Sliabh Luachra with its associations with poets and schools of poets. Across the river in Scrahanaveal O'Rahilly was born. Here in Gneeveguilla Eoghan Rua opened his first school. Beyond the river in those days had been Kenmare land. Gneeveguilla on the west of the Quagmire had been part of the land still belonging to the Maccarthy Mór. [note: The Hidden Ireland. P.193.] Poor scholars came into that country "for nowhere else in Ireland were so many sweet singers gathered together: the south-west corner of Munster was the Attica of Irish Ireland and Sliabh Luachra its Hymettus."[note: ibid. P.194.] 
Two hundred years after, there was only one man watching his cattle from the sheltery side of a ditch, two girls gossiping at a well in the middle of the flat fields eyeing the stranger with good-natured curiosity. The man was not a very old man and he wisely pointed out that remembering the past had more to do with one's temperament than with one's actual age. He said: "There are older men than myself in the parish who don't remember one of these things. It must be in the twang of your temperament." Certainly, he remembered Aodhagan. Wasn't Aodhagan born within sight of the spot where we sheltered behind the hedge, hadn't he lived for a while in Stagmount a short distance nearer to Killarney. There was a rumour, though, that the poet had been reared in County Cork; and, as for Stagmount, there was no certainty where the actual site of the dwelling had been, or the site of the well that Father Dinneen had mentioned as Aodhagan's Well. A man had once suggested a possible site at a place called the Top of the Meadows. Anyway, it was somewhere over there beyond the slope of Scrahanaveal. The Kenmare papers didn't tell one much about O'Rahilly. He had read them very carefully. But then it was difficult to get any information about him, like chasing a ghost. Consider, even the man's name was in doubt. Was he O'Rahilly or O'Reilly? From what he had heard the Kerry farmer concluded that the Cavan people had never even heard of Aodhagan. Was the name a double-barrelled name or was he really Owen O'Rahilly? Aodhagan had been proud of the name, very proud. Hadn't he told the story of the trout that spoke to him when he was fording a stream. The trout had said: "Don't trample heavily on me, Aodhagan O'Rahilly." 
Was he as good a poet as Eoghan Rua or the O' Scannells or Geoffrey O'Donohue of the Glen? That was a debatable question, and with wary academic precision that Kerry farmer debated the point, turned his arguments this way and that way, until once again I was troubled with that vague feeling of half-recognition. Fineen O' Scannell had written a song to the tune of The Palatine's Daughter, a fine song and well-written, the lilt filled out with melodious words. And Father Dinneen? He remembered him well, tramping these very fields, collecting the songs, poems, stories, the great words read and recited among these hills. Some happy whim of the gods had given to a locality that had so much untouched treasure an industrious Scholar who understood the value of those things. Or was it that the spirit of the place gave birth in a man's soul to the knowledge of their worth and the desire to guard and preserve them? ' A young man crossed the field to the well, swinging a white bucket, whistling cheerily, and I realised that the dusk had crept up from the flat land and the little river, hiding the slopes where a poet had been born, leaving us isolated on the slopes where another poet had opened a school. That cold misty half-light was the time for fantasy and I had a feeling that the man who spoke to me of books and poems might at any moment prove true to his townland by telling me in lyrical Gaelic verse the story of some obscure, symbolic vision. Then I understood that feeling of half-recognition, and I understood for a moment the stories of the time two centuries ago with learned spalpeens and poetic ploughboys, with a broken people holding fiercely by their ancient learning and their ancient faith, making for themselves in the middle of desolation a Hymettus and an Arcadia. I shook hands with Charles O'Leary, the last native-speaker of Gaelic in that lost Hymettus. He said: "In Tyrone now, in Dungannon, is the castle of the great O'Neill still there?" I described the town as well as a man from West Tyrone could. He said: "I always wanted to see that place. He was a great man." I went down the wet road past Meentogues school, wondering what would be the fate of Eoghan Rua to-day as a scholar or a schoolteacher. All about me the land faded backwards into the shadows, the low hills, the moors, the mountains, the fields with the black cattle, backwards over long centuries to the awful day when the great O'Neill from Dungannon failed and fell back in these southern places. For on that day began the scatterment and desolation of the chieftains and their poets. Maybe it was the best thing that ever happened this country. Maybe it was the worst. Maybe it could have been avoided. Maybe it was as inevitable as most great tragedies. At any rate it sent Aodhagan O'Rahilly wandering in his land without dry weather, without a stream, without a star; lamenting the passing of an order and a scheme of things as one might lament the end of the world and the overthrow of creation. Nowhere in the collapse did he see the material that men could use for rebuilding and remaking. He was not, by any means, a prophet. He foresaw nothing of the Ireland to come. He certainly did not foresee the commercials around the fire in the hotel-lounge, talking of Upton Sinclair and Flann O'Brien, listening to a Nelson Eddy record broadcast from some radio station, listening also to the pop-popping of a ping-pong ball in the dining-room, the sound of dance music across the street, the footsteps of Killarney people going down to the cinema. Up in the hills a man drove his cattle home through the dusk and along a wet lane; sat later by his fire, turned the pages of a book and was back more than two hundred years with the poet that the trout spoke to, or the vagabond poet who founded a school, or the poet whose dead body swung in the wind on a Cromwellian gallows in Killarney town. 
8 In one small district of one part of Munster he lived his life and wrote his poems, lamenting the wounds of the land of Fodhla, the ruin that befell the great families of Erin; and as he saw it the wounds were one and the same thing with the ruin. Through the shadowy land of his lamentation the spouse of Brian rode on horseback telling of the day that the merchant's son would return to her, and she lived on in loneliness and without a lover, because the merchant's son did not return. The bright vision, that he saw somewhere on a lonely path, faded, and 
along the path rode a wicked, croaking, yellow down and his black companions. He wrote the wedding-song for the son of one of the last of the great houses and when the son for some good reasons of his own, closed his house to the poet, the reaction was into a poem in which he concentrated and expressed his own melancholy bitterness. For the great houses were going and taking with them into an eternity of shadows the peculiar rights of the poets of the Gaelic order; the mansion of Tadhg an Duna at Castle Tochar; the tall castle of Fineen O'Donoghue; of John O'Mahony, the freckled in Dunloe; these were isolated, islanded places in a land swamped by three waves of conquest. It is quite possible that he journeyed outside his own district to houses such as these, for every elegy or wedding-song or poem of pure praise would imply an inducement or a reward, payment or hospitality. He crossed into Clare to enjoy the hospitality of O'Callaghan. At Ballykennely he found a vision of goodness and beauty that could not be described fully or property on parchment, in a female phoenix of the Geraldine blood, a cousin of the children of Milesius. At Ballyseedy in Kerry John Blennerhassett died, a hero and a warrior who had apparently understood the poet well enough to merit one hundred and twenty elegiac lines. The shoes given him in Glenflesk might have carried him as far as Kilcash when the Butlers and the Browns made that happy union. At Ballyvourney the poets heard his voice as he came through the night to recite and contend among his soul's equals, and a man called Murphy bespoke for the power and the wit of Aodhagán a hundred welcomes. Somewhere off the Kerry coast he saw a ship wrecked, the crew screaming as they went down under the bulk of the waves, and around the tragedy he wrote a poem of which the wrecking passage of the years has left one quatrain. At Castleisland he saw a fair and a faction-fight and preserved for us in a few resonant phrases the very noises of that forgotten conflict. From isolated references, from knowledge almost accidentally conveyed, from sparse traditions and apocryphal stories of a supposedly-simple lad driving hard bargains at country fairs, it might be possible to map out the few short journeys of this untravelled man. Possibly that one journey to the lovely place where the Lee meets the ocean was made by way of the castle in Glenflesk, and the O'Leary country, down from the mountains and over the rolling green hills to the town of Cork. We do not know what he thought of the biggest town he ever visited. There is no written record of that journey, nothing except that story of the classical volume acquired by a trick from a city bookseller. He would possibly have known the details of the quarrel and lawsuit between Tadhg Dubh Cronin and Sir Matthew Deane of Dromore, and how Deane had put upon Cronin in Cork city the inconvenience of arrest. North of Cork at Whitechurch there was a school of the poets and more than a century later a few of the last lingering Gaelic poets died in the vicinity of the city. But we do not know the name of any man that Aodhagan spoke to in those streets, nor of any house he entered except the bookshop where the man behind the counter pitied his tatters, jokingly offered him a book if he could read the Greek that covered its pages. According to the story, the voice of suffering and neglected learning spoke in the tattered poet, read the lines, dumbfounded the bookseller, and gained a book . The booksellers in present-day Cork do not do business in that way for when some mystic sense of a pilgrim's obligations sent me bookbuying there the girl in the shop offered no sporting bargain. The book I bought was Smollett's Humphrey Clinker and it may have been that the girl did not consider the ability to read English uncommon enough to justify the risk of a wager. So I paid my money and walked the bright curves of Patrick Street with Humphrey Clinker safe in my pocket, then up the sunny Mardyke to lean on a bridge over black water with the Cork College of the National University above me on the hill. The night without stars had ended and the day had come; a bright, lively day in Cork City with traffic going up and down the Mardyke, and students cycling down the hill from the college, and everything standing out virile and distinct in the bright sun. I forgot the tattered poet, found myself wondering about the students, calculating the advantages or disadvantages of going to college in Cork instead of in Dublin. Then I forgot the students remembered Humphrey Clinker, old Bramble and his pills, Aunt Tabitha Bramble and her suitors down to the great Lismahago, Lydia Melford and her fashionable tendency to swoon at the sight of anyone remotely resembling her vanished lover, their adventures at Bath and in London and on the long journey into Scotland. I read from one of the letters of the lovely Lydia: “Sir Ulic Mackilligut recommended his nephew, Captain O'Donaghan, to me as a partner; but Jery excused himself by saying I had got the headache." Well, that was going on in England roughly about the time the poet from Kerry got himself a book in Cork city, and Sir Ulic was Ireland as the novelist Smollett saw it. But Smollett saw the contemporary scene on the larger island on which he lived, put his observations into his novels, left them as a lasting comment on a period. O'Rahilly took his book with him and went back into the mountains to a life that is to us, for the most part, a mystery . . He was not writing in English and shaping a literary form for the future. He was making poems in a language that was to come very near to total extinction. All around him the ragged thousands lived on in the gloom that followed the death and banishment of their leaders, and he did not know that with them was the secret of the bright city by the Lee, and the busy streets in which I bought the volume of Smollett, and the churches, the houses going up above the river, the students going up the hill to the college with the step of the sons and daughters of free men. 
9 He took his book with him and all that it told him of Greece and Rome, and went back into the mountains to the thunder of the wave in the dark night, to the cataract crying like an animal in the woods, to a grave between ' grey walls where holy men had prayed for centuries. Possibly there is in those two great poems of lamentation more of the man and of his understanding of his own time than in anything else he ever composed. They reveal the man because they are terrible with an intensity of bitterness and pride that denotes sincere and genuine utterance, just as the last few sonnets of Hopkins betray the torture of the soul of a very different man in a very different time. They reveal the time, because with just that agony of bitterness and pride the soul and body of Gaelic Ireland came apart, not as in decent and honourable death but in a trance and torpor that left a half-decayed body tormented with whispers and visions of something that had been and now was not. The long wave gathered power from the wide waters of Dingle Bay advanced and swelled and crashed against the rocks at Rossbeigh, and died in a pitiful whisper along the fiat sands. Somewhere in the night, in a miserable hut, the poet heard the voice of the wave and spoke to it in answer. He had no cattle, no wealth, no sheep, no horned cows. In his poverty he lived on dog-fish and periwinkles. If the great MacCarthy of the Laune were only alive neither the poet nor his children would live in this destitution and misery. But the MacCarthys were gone from the Laune, the Lein and the Lee, gone from Kanturk, from all the land between Cashel and the wave of Cliodhna and across to Thomond. For the poet and his children there was left only a miserable hovel on the shore, and outside the darkness, the rain, the storm, the bellowing of the relentless wave.  "Thou wave below, of great repute, loud-voiced, The senses of my head are overpowered with thy bellowing; Were help to come again to fair Erin, I would thrust thy discordant clamour down thy throat." [note: “ A thonn so thíos is aoirde céim go hárd,
Meabhair mo chinn claoidhte ót bhéiceach tá;
Cabhair dá dtigheadh arís go hÉirinn bháin
Do ghlam nach binn do dhingfinn féin it bhrághaid.”]
Fair Erin remained without help, and from that poem to the other great lament written on his deathbed there is no change of note, except that pride has hardened into defiance of all the miserable chances that can happen to 111,an, into a belief in a life beyond this life in which the chieftains whose line went back before the death of Christ would have their rightful place, and he have his in relation to them. "I will not cry for help until I am put in the narrow coffin." [note: “Rachad-sa a haithle searc na laoch don chill.] "I will follow the beloved among heroes to the grave." [note: Cabhair ní ghoirfead go gcuirtear mé I gcruinnchomhrainn.”] That made, if you like, a very appropriate deathbed statement from a poet who had consistently used his power to praise such men as that beloved among heroes, to lament the end of the world to which those men belonged. When he lay back on his bed and died, that world had ended with a finality that even Aodhagan the poet, who knew his own merit, would have found it difficult to appreciate. For he was the last great voice that spoke authentically for the vanished order, that superseded scheme of things. The first three decades of the eighteenth century had come to an end. For more than seventy years the poor people in the cabins stumbled through darkness as deep as that ill which he replied to the bellow and lament of the waves. They had poets who understood them better than Aodhagan ever cared to understand them. They had no leaders, and the poets looked over the seas to a king who was not their king, who had never been a leader, who had never even been a satisfying legend. But never again after the death of O'Rahilly did any poet see, except in transient and imagined glimpses, the fabulous hospitality of Clonmeen or Killeen or Killaha, never again did they see the lords of the Laune, the Lein and the Lee walk in majesty before a worshipping people. For practical purposes that was just as well. The new king who was to make a new people came also out of those mountains, and fashioned his people in a way that would have wiped out for ever the memory of the majesty of those men. The transient and imagined glimpses passed on from popular poets to the people who heard them, projected themselves into the vision given by the new king, left us to-day with an irritatingly insecure hold on the secret on which Aodhagan O'Rahilly closed his lips, and died. 
10 They buried him at Muckross between the lake and the mountains, between grey walls that holy men had built and Cromwellian men had desecrated, under the sanctuary of trees that holy men had planted. In 1840 someone read and interpreted the inscription on the tombstone as: This tomb belongs to the race of Daniel son of Morgan Rahilly from Raheen. To-day a plain plaque on the wall honours the three great poets that the mountainy places of Kerry gave to Ireland for all time. In the cloister a few yards away is the great yew tree where according to an old story Aodhagan saw the son of a rapacious settler swing, his young neck caught between two of the ancient branches. The bitter poet praised the tree for its pleasant fruit, prayed that every branch on that tree and every branch on every tree in the land would bear like fruit. Now there is peace around the grey ruin, and under the great trees, and on the wide lake, and under the mountain where there is only the cry of the white cataract leaping from rock to rock. He, in his misery, also heard that cry: "No tune comes near me as I weep on the roads, But the squeal of the hog which cannot be wounded by sticking." [note: Fonn ní thigeann im ghoire is mé ag caoi ar bhóithribh, Acht foghar na mioce nach gointear le saighdeoireacht.”] To-day the screaming hog is ticketed and guarded in the interests of the great democracy of touristry. You pay your money and walk right up a carefully arranged path parallel to the white descent of the water. When I last made that ascent I did it in company with a man from America whose people had left that land a century ago. We walked back to Killarney through a dusk coming spasmodically alive with the glimmer and movement of stars. He talked as only Americans can talk of all the things that Americans find to talk about. Not far away on our left hand and under the stars the body of Aodhagan O'Rahilly, the poet from Scrahanaveal, had returned to the dust.
