If there is one city in Ireland worthy of honour in the annals of music, that city surely is Belfast. It was there that Bunting took down from the last of the Irish harpers those tunes that formed the beginnings of his great collection and it was there, over a hundred years later, that Carl Hardebeck, by enlightened transcriptions and arrangements of native melodies gave us for all time standards of judgment in Irish music. Belfast, then, has seen the beginning of an era with Bunting-an era of collection, questioning and experiment - and with Hardebeck an era of analysis, judgment and final synthesis. This final synthesis I have called the rediscovery of Irish music and I shall begin now by stating two of its primary truths. Like John Mitchell I do not argue - I dogmatize. Irish music is based (a) on the rhythm and accentuation of Irish poetry and (b) on the scales within the compass of our -national instrument, the harp. That the language is the primary influence we 'may infer from the fact that the harp is referred to in our oldest manuscripts as being used to accompany the recitation of poetry. Please notice the word recitation. The chief poet in a king's household sat as an honoured guest at his master's table whilst his poetry was recited, to the accompaniment of a harp, by an official known as a reacaire. It is evident that such music as was played must inevitably have been determined as to rhythm and accent by the metrical construction of the poetry. Furthermore, when the harp -later came to be used by the singers themselves it apparently had no other function than to play the melody that was being sung. That this playing involved some sort of contrapuntal harmony is not now disputed, and so one of our greatest boasts is that we as a nation were the first in Western Europe to have a knowledge of harmony. It probably developed vocally in our monastic schools, and in this connection we should remember that one of the most famous of the monasteries was known as Beann Chor, the Sweet Choir, our present Bangor. The interaction of Church music and native Irish music I am not qualified to discuss but I do know that in the twelfth century Irish ecclesiastics used to carry harps around with them for the purpose of accompanying the Plain Chant, and that the secular musicians of that time were praised for their "animated execution, their sweet and pleasing harmony and their intricate modulations." Giraldus Cambrensis, who came over here in 1183, and who certainly cannot be accused of partiality to the Irish, has this to say of out native musicians : "They are incomparably more skilful than any other nation I have ever seen. For their manner of playing on these instruments (the cruit, the clairseach and the tiompan) unlike that of the Britons to which I am accustomed is lively and rapid, while the melody is both sweet and pleasing. It is astonishing that in such a complex and rapid movement of the fingers the musical proportions can be preserved, and that throughout the difficult modulations on their various instruments the harmony, notwithstanding shakes and slurs and variously· intertwined counterpoint, is completely observed." So, patronized by the native chiefs and encouraged by the Church, which always formed a nexus between free Ireland and the Continent of Europe, our native music flourished until the beginning of the seventeenth century. With the defeat of Kinsale in 1601 the old Irish social order received a blow from which it never recovered. The ancient aristocratic organization of society was broken up and the schools of poetry and music, deprived of their generous patrons, were scattered and broken. The wandering harper and the wandering poet were left as the sole custodians of our literary and musical tradition. Remember the date, 1601, for I must now digress for a moment to speak of those scales which, as I have said, are characteristic of Irish music. The Irish harp, once it was tuned, was fixed and unalterable in pitch. (The pitch-changing pedal as we know it to-day was unknown until 1720 when Hochbrucker, of Bavaria, first introduced it.) The Irish scales were therefore based on the only possible system within the compass of the instrument. and that was the modal system. Now, what is a mode? To explain in terms of the modern pianoforte, I shall ask you to think of the keyboard without the black keys. If you play Doh Ray Me Fah Sob Lah Te Doh on the white notes, you have a progression which we call the Doh mode. Starting from Ray and playing eight white notes, you have played the Ray mode. Similarly Me to its octave gives the Me mode, Fah to its octave the Fah mode, Soh and Lah to their octaves the Soh and Lah modes. These six modes were the scales of the Irish harp. Now I should like you to examine a few possibilities within the modes. If you play the Fah mode and omit its fourth, you have a Doh mode deficient in a fourth, and if you play the Sob mode, omitting its seventh, you have a Doh mode deficient in its seventh. That leaves the Irish harper with three Doh modes of different pitch, one of which is complete and the other two deficient, one in its fourth and the other in its seventh. It is a pet theory of my own that these three scales were the foundation of our famous three types of music, Geantraighe, Goltraighe and Suantraighe, but which of the three modes were the most likely to express the emotions of Love, Sorrow and Tranquillity I shall leave to our psychologists. And now while I am still in what Dr. Henebry calls "the domain of inventive election" I should like also to air my own ideas on the so-called gapped scale. The fact that some of 
our melodies are constructed without the use of the fourth and seventh of the scale has led theorists of the evolutionary school to the conclusion that the original Irish music was based on five tones alone, or as they say in their learned way, it was pentatonic. Now I believe that in this sphere, as in many others, our evolutionists have taken an effect for a cause, a development for an origin. I have shown that our Fah mode minus its fourth and our Sob mode minus its seventh have the character of incomplete Doh modes. Now limitation is a never failing source of all art and it is quite in character with the empirical disposition of all musicians that the practice of scales deficient, one in a fourth and the other in a seventh, should lead to composition in a scale deficient in both, that is in a Scale without semitones, a gapped scale. Rory Dall O Cahan's composition, Tabhair damh do Lamh, which Bunting' dates 1603, is in this pentatonic scale, and there is no question at all but that O Cahan's harp had both semi-tones if he had elected to use them. On the Evolutionists’ theory Tabhair damh do Lamh would have originated "under the oaks of the druidical grove" or "in the shade of the hazels at the world's end." But 1603 has far other associations in Irish history. To return to the gapped scale, it is interesting that the two typical accidentals in Irish music occur at the intervals of a fourth and a seventh, and it seems to me that this fact arose from the supplying of an obvious deficiency by singers especially in the golden period of polyphony. But my purpose now is not to ride my favourite hobby-horses. I wish simply to point out the reasons for the modal character of our airs and, as a necessary corollary, the modal nature of their contrapuntal harmony. Now before we revert to 1601 in Ireland, I should like to take a brief glance at the development of music on the continent of Europe from the time of Ireland's great missionary efforts there until the beginning of the seventeenth century. In Europe the Plainsong period lasted from the beginning of Christian times until the end of the thirteenth century, and during this time the music was unisonal, was in the modes, and had no instrumental accompaniment. With this period of European music the fame of our Irish monks is inextricably bound up. "All musical persons," says Grattan Flood, "have read of the world-renowned monastery of St. Gall in Switzerland, but the fact is too often ignored that its foundation in the year 612 was the work of the Irish saint, Cellach, whose name has been Latinized Gallus or Gall. This great Irishman, a student of Bangor, Co. Down, the friend and disciple of St. Columbanus, died on October 16th, 646, and at his demise, the fame of his music school became known far and near." Saint Maoldubh, the founder of Malmesbury, in England, is best known as the tutor of St. Aldhehn who was the first Englishman to refer to neumes- ' and anyone who has heard Sal Og Ruadh will realize the significance of that fact. Dungal, an Irish monk, founded a great school at Pavia, and on his death at Bobbio, in 834, bequeathed among other books three Antiphonaries which are still preserved at Milan. In 870 St. Moengal (Marcellus) was appointed headmaster of the music school of St. Gall's and under his direction it became the wonder and delight of Europe. His successor was another, Irishman, Tuathal, latinized Tutilo, and he was known as a skilled performer on the cruit and psaltery. Two of his most famous compositions, Rodie Cantandus and Omnipotens Genitor, betray, I am told, all the characteristics of Irish music. St. Notker (Nuacar, Cnocubar) in the same monastery at the same time is best known to students of the liturgy as the inventor of sequences. In 1015 St. Helias, a native of Monaghan, introduced the Roman chant to Cologne, and in 1090 St. Diumna or Domnus founded the monastery of Ratisbon which has ever since been connected with the history of European music. But I need not go on in this strain-those who wish to know more about the period can read a very interesting account of it in Grattan Flood's History of Irish Music. The Plainsong period then lasted in Europe until the end of the thirteenth century when it was superseded by the great period of polyphony, in which the music was in parts, was also in the modes, had no instrumental accompaniment and was written in pure counterpoint. It was brought to its highest point of perfection by Palestrina and Vittoria and at the beginning of the seventeenth century-remember our date, 1601, the Defeat of Kinsale-men were already as Sir Richard Terry has put it, "casting about for new modes of expression." Ireland and Irish musicians had no part in this new era, and for very good historical reasons. 
Irish harpers, pipers and musicians of all kinds had joined in the last great fight of a United Ireland, and, after defeat, had acted as messengers between the scattered chieftains, and as spies among the English. In 1603 a proclamation was issued by the Lord President of Munster for the extermination by martial law of "all manner of bards, harpers, etc.," and within ten days of it, Queen Elizabeth herself ordered Lord Barrymore "to hang the harpers wherever found." Proscribed and banned, hunted and persecuted, as they were, they still practised composition in the only style known to them, and the standard of their melodies bears wonderful witness to the high state of perfection reached in the schools before the Black Day of Kinsale. During the first decade of the seventeenth century Ceann Dubh Dilis and Uileachdn Dubh Ó were composed. Somewhere between 1615 and 1630 An Cnotadh Ban or The White Cockade first saw the light-and it may be interesting to state here that this tune and La Fhéile Padraig were the two tunes played by the war-pipers of the Irish Brigade at Fontenoy on May 11th, 1745. (That day, by the way, was the last on which the píob mór was ever heard playing before an Irish Army.) 1648 marks the composition of a great favourite, An Druimfhionn Donn Dileas, which itself speaks eloquently of the disturbed state of Ireland at that time. Knowing it we cannot be surprised at what I should call the 1654 version of national registration-the Cromwellian identity card : all harpers, pipers and wandering musicians had to obtain letters from the magistrate of the district they hailed from, before being allowed to travel through the country, and this passport contained full particulars as to age, stature, beard, colour of hair and condition of life of the recipient. All musical instruments savouring of popery were ruthlessly destroyed, so that Archdeacon Lynch, a contemporary writer, was of the opinion that within a short time scarce a single harp would be left in Ireland. Yet, to the time before the Restoration, we owe one of our most beautiful melodies, Táimse 'mo chodladh 's ná dúisigh mé, in which are found the two fearsome lines, indicative of the Irish temper at the time: Go bhfeiceam an lá a mbeidh ár ar Shasanaigh 
Ughaim ar a ndroma 's iad a' treabhadh a's a' branar duinn. 
But that day they were not to see. The condition of the harpers became worse and worse, the tide of anglicisation swept on from Dublin, and after the Defeat of Limerick our Irish musicians were but interesting relics of defeated greatness, depending for their livelihood on the charity of their down-trodden fellows, or, what was worse, on the condescension and patronage of their conquerors. The Pale spread and with it the cultivated and artificial music of the Continent, and Ireland's music declined before the music of its rulers. Carolan, who is often erroneously referred to as the last of the bards, was really the first Irish harper to adopt imported and un-Irish forms of expression. Though he composed numerous airs in the true traditional style he was influenced very much by the music of Geminiani, Vivaldi and Corelli, and wrote a concerto in the Italian style. He was praised by many musicians of the new school in England and on the Continent, but, as I shall show, that praise was the first sound of the death knell of Irish instrumental music. However, throughout the century other Irish musicians maintained the old traditions and relaxed laws allowed their "assembly" at various places. We find a John Murphy, harper, playing for the "fashionable and polite" at Mallow between 1746 and 1753. In 1745 our most remarkable 
harper, Denis O'Hampsey, was in Edinburgh at the Court of the young Pretender, and he familiarized the Scots with many Irish tunes, notably Eibhlin a Run which they now call Robin Adair. In the period 1750-1790 our most famous harpers, besides O'Hampsey who lived to play for Bunting in l792, were Jerome Duigenan, Dominic Mongan and Arthur O'Neill. Mongan is credited with An Raibh Tu ag an gCarraig? a tune whose · metrical basis is so unEnglish that Moore had to evolve a new metre to represent it. "At the mid hour of night when stars are weeping, I fly." Duigenan won a competition against a Welsh harper on the floor of the Irish House of Commons in Dublin, and Arthur O'Neill was the harper who gave Bunting his interesting list of Irish musical terms and many of the tunes for his first collection. Our pipers at this period deserve mention. As I have said, the war pipe appeared for the last time at Fontenoy but the uileann pipe continued in popularity and many beautiful tunes were composed for it, for instance, Plearacha an Ghleanna and The Dear Irish Boy, which so intrigued Handel when on a visit to Dublin, 1741, that he copied it into his MSS. music-book. Twenty years later Piper Jackson flourished and composed the famous airs, all named after himself-Jackson's Morning Brush, Jackson's Maggot, Jackson's Cup, and so on. 1770 saw the composition of Brennan on the Moor in praise of the noted Rapparee, and in 1779 the people of Connaught were dancing to the air of The Geese in the Bog and The Hare in the Corn. Now these dance-tunes of all kinds we know to be no more than fast strict-tempo adaptations of slow-tunes and consequently of the same modal structure. Most of our ceilidhe band leaders who speak so glibly of "minor airs" should study this matter a little-and educate their piano-accordionists. For the Irish pipers who composed most of our ceilidhe music were all working in the Irish modes and, like O'Hampsey and O'Neill on the harp, were conscious upholders of the national tradition. That is, they were composing airs and music of the same modal character as that which had been the glory of Ireland before Kinsale .. The school-music of the pre-Kinsale era was the one source that fed the broadstream of seventeenth and eighteenth century composition. But Europe meanwhile had moved far away from the modes. Polyphony, as I have said, gave way in the seventeenth century to new forms of expression. To quote Sir Richard Terry again: "The fondness for cadences with a leading note had become universal and from this small beginning came the whole system of our modem tonality. The fascination of this new progression gradually undermined the practice of the modes and drove composers -empirically and blindly, no doubt, but none the less surely-in the direction of keys. By the eighteenth century modal music was no longer practised [in Europe]. The major and minor keys had been discovered and established, and the full flood-tide of modern music had begun." Thus far Terry. Now, the system of music based on keys and tonality had just come to its greatest point of development in Mozart and Beethoven, when Edward Bunting, their contemporary, who had been trained in that system, was asked by the organizers of the Belfast Harp Festival in 1792 to take down the airs played by the last of the Irish harpers. The new system was confronted with the old, the modes were presented as something strange and new to a mind trained to think in keys and tonality. The inevitable happened. Airs in the modes were forced into major and minor keys and the rhythm of some of our most beautiful airs crushed and warped in the straight-jacket of regular bars and neoclassical phrasing. Now I am not saying this in disparagement of Bunting-as a Belfast-Armagh man I yield to none in my admiration for the Armagh-Belfast man-but I am saying merely that Edward Bunting was a man of his time. The Gaelic words which in his later travellings he caused to be taken down apart from the melodies were used not as a pointer to the construction of the tunes but as raw material for the deplorable verse that Thomas Campbell wrote in the edition of 1809. Bunting, to his great credit, realized later that these words were ruinous of the character of his airs and dispensed with them altogether in his next collection, I 840. But the Gaelic words never appeared with the tunes of which they were the form. Tom Moore was accepted even by Bunting himself as a writer of sweeter poetry than any to be found in the "rude Gaelic originals." Though he stormed at Moore and Stevenson for their botching and recasting of his airs, he never seems to have considered the preservation of the Gaelic poetry as a necessary means of ensuring their structural integrity. So whilst silly English period poetry was absent from Bunting's last great book, the Irish words were also omitted, and the airs were dressed out in all the tricks and ornaments of a music unsuited to their character. However, the important part of Bunting's work he had done manfully and well-he had shown his countrymen that they possessed a glorious heritage in their national music, and he had inspired others to follow in his footsteps. Soon after his time we get the great collections of Petrie, Joyce and O'Neill of Chicago. In 1851 the ''Society for the Preservation and Publication of the Melodies of Ireland'' was founded and its first President was Dr. George Petrie. He issued a great collection of "Ancient Irish Music" in 1855 and in his introduction to that work made two revolutionary statements which I beg leave to quote in extenso: "Our Irish airs are not, like so many modern melodies, mere ad libitum arrangements of tones, unshackled by a rigid obedience to metrical laws, they are an arrangement of tones, in a general way expressive of the sentiments of the songs for which they were composed, but always strictly coincident with, and subservient to, the laws of rhythm and metre which govern the construction of these songs, and to which they consequently owe their peculiarities of structure." "I might have made this volume one of far higher musical pretensions and, probably, popular interest by entrusting the harmonization of the airs to professional musicians of 
known ability. But I knew of none who had devoted any particular study to the peculiarities of structure and tonalities which so often distinguish our melodies from those of modern times, and I consequently feared that harmonies of a learned and elaborate nature, constructed with a view to the exhibition of scientific knowledge, as well as the gratification of conventional tastes, might often appear to me unsuited to the simple character and peculiar expression of our airs." These two statements of Petrie were the wisest remarks made on Irish music in the nineteenth century. But Irish musicians ignored them and went blissfully on arranging and adapting and distorting Irish music to conform with the standards of foreign musical theory. To them I might apply the words of Helmholz in his Sensations of Tone, published in 1862: "The feeling for historical artistic conception has certainly made little progress as yet among our musicians. They judge old music by the rules of modern harmony and are inclined to consider every deviation from it as mere unskilfulness in the old composer, or even as barbarous lack of taste." But a change was coming not only in Ireland, but on the Continent. Revolting from the ·formalism which was cramping the musical expression of all the nations into one mould, the countries of Europe turned in the late nineteenth century for inspiration and freshness of expression to the idiom of their own native folk-tunes. Smetana and Dvorak in Bohemia, Rimsky-Korsakov and Borodin in Russia, Grieg and Svendsen in Scandinavia, Sibelius in Finland, Faure in France, Albeniz in Spain and Vaughan Williams in England all represent this great return to origins in music. The Church, too, was in the van of the movement and returned to study the Plainchant of the past. And here we have an interesting analogy with the history of the revival of Irish music. When Plainsong began to be revived, and the editions of Rheims, Cambrai, Mechlin, and Ratisbon were issued, the arbitrary time-values assigned to the various notes by the pioneers of polyphony were held to be the proper ones for Plainsong, and so the free rhythm of the chant was ruined. Not until the problem was tackled with historical realism by the monks of Solesmes was the Plainsong restored in its primitive purity. Irish music at this time was in much the same state as Plainsong before Solesmes. Only a thorough-going reaction could save it, only a study of the relation of language and music could ensure its survival. That reaction came. In 1893 the Gaelic League was founded in Dublin and the work of the restoration of the Irish language was enthusiastically begun. The word Gaeltacht came into the English language, or into our Irish brand of it. Strange songs were heard in the Galltacht, songs with Irish words and no accompaniments. At last the Gaelic music was being heard without the distractions of unsympathetic accompaniments, and in Belfast a young musician who heard it, became enamoured of its beauty and resolved to devote his life to its cultivation. His name was Carl Hardebeck. Realizing that a proper understanding of this music was impossible without a knowledge of the Irish language, he set himself to study the language and logically enough found himself eventually in the Gaeltacht. Here he took down airs and words together and decided in writing them to preserve their rhythm at all costs. This led him to changes of time-signature so frequent that he must have made the heads of his contemporaries whirl. But he preserved the rhythm of our songs and for the first time they were heard on our concert platforms with arrangements that pointed to their excellences. Steeped in polyphony as he was, he recognised at once the modal structure of our airs, made a particular study of Plainsong under Arthur de Muelemeester of Belfast, and evolved a system of harmony for Irish songs that was entirely in keeping with their character. For him, the song was primary and the arrangement (and the arranger) secondary. ,"I look upon an Irish song" he often said, "as I look upon a beautiful lady. My accompaniments are merely gifts of pearls that serve to emphasise her beauty." The patterned accompaniments of 
Stanford, Esposito and the rest he cast aside, and the only liberty he allowed himself was the musical interpretation of the poems. He put an end to the writing of quasi senza tempo above Irish songs in the manner of Harty and Hughes; he showed up the ineptitude of transcriptions plastered with chromatic intervals unknown to Irish music; he shamed the flamboyant arranger by the power of his economic accompaniments. But he preached a hard doctrine, and one that after fifty years of the Gaelic Revival and twenty-five years of conditioned freedom is still unacceptable to the majority of our more highly publicized musicians. It was simply this. The proper treatment of Gaelic music demands that the Irish musician should steep himself heart and soul in the poetry and philosophy of the Gaeltacht. No amount of study of Bach, Handel and Beethoven, no amount of interpretation of Stravinsky or Prokofiev will compensate for ignorance of the Gaelic mind. To reinforce this precept by example he sacrificed a career as a composer to do the preliminary spade-work of arrangement. But to show his conviction that Irish music could not live on arrangements alone he composed some orchestral pieces, one of the most remarkable of which is his Seoithin Seo. It depends entirely. for its understanding on a knowledge and appreciation of the poem which inspired it, it illustrates every verse of the poem, and it reflects its every mood. It will never be understood by people who hear nothing in it but its sounds. It never was appreciated by those whose outlook on Gaelic music was unconditioned by a knowledge of the language. They simply turned their backs on Hardebeck, and for his integrity he lived and died in comparative obscurity. But, like Bunting, he had inspired others, and he rejoiced to see younger men adopting his approach to the subject. I shall mention only two of these: Micheal O Baoighill, the music director of Radio Eireann, and Reamonn O Frighil of Derry who has already by his co-operation with Comhaltas Uladh shown unmistakably his appreciation of the values for which Hardebeck sacrificed his all. O Frighil has found his inspiration in the Donegal Gaeltacht and has composed orchestral works of outstanding merit' in the native idiom. Hardebeck's work is bearing fruit in Ulster where it started and we are not without hope that it will lead to a golden harvest eventually all over Ireland. But meanwhile we can still boast as we have boasted so often in other connections that the North began, and the North holds on!
