Some hard things have been said against our effort to revive the Gaelic Nation. The so-called realist school says it is impossible, though they grant that we may continue to read the Irish language. We have to make an effort to see what these makers of history have on their side. They have had their counterparts in every generation since the Treaty of Limerick and the Wild Geese, not to go back any farther. The extreme expression of their feeling may be found in the phrase attributed to O'Connell, that Irishmen wouldn't care if Irish were sunk seven leagues under the Atlantic, since English is our language of utility and beauty. It might have been retorted that Irish, like a new Atlantis, might re-appear again. The fact is, however, that we are at present a truncated state and nation, two states within the four seas of Ireland. Royalty, tyranny, democracy and "Eirism" are all cultivated within the area, and penetrating everywhere there is a furtive imperialism supported by cultural and economic arguments. Yet, everywhere too, there is at least one unifying leaven-Gaelicisation. What the Gaels say is: we don't care what you call our idea, our cult, our ideal. Irish with Davis and Griffith; or Gaelic with Pearse. They are all one. If Irish or Norman or Anglo-Irish have anything of good in them, it is the Gael who can claim it in his own land. One real life story, of a poet in the real Irish mode, is one answer among many, by its inspiration, to the retort, "Impossible!" when we say, in face of the facts, that we can revive the Gaelic Nation. We recall the improbus labor of St. Columbanus's boat song. We are going to reconstruct the world of a Gael of the Gaels to give us a plan. The critic should always be a philosopher, consciously or scientifically, as it is called; or unconsciously, and then it will be the wisdom of commonsense, which is intuition, seeing life rightly and naturally. Man, created and redeemed, does seek the good naturally. He seeks the good in general. The corruption of the best comes from the Fall. It has become then the Decline and Fall we see in all history. We see it integrally and truly as real history in such a book as Human Caravan by Comte du Plessis, the best antidote to all the profane English histories that are still being read. He guides his synthesis of all history in the light of three facts. You can take them or leave them, but the facts are stubborn, as is truth. The divinity of Christ is fact number one; the transcendence of the Catholic Church is fact number two; and the unity and God-controlled direction of history is fact number three. The third fact is the one that needs most elucidation in these times when the arrogance of the human mind is most patently blatant, and yet least acknowledged as such. The non-Catholic has come to think that man creates history. He does make history it is true, sometimes tragically, but only as a secondary cause. There is One Who created, and He is the only one Who can bring good out of evil. He was before man, he is through and through him in Christ and He will be with His saints and angels for ever and ever. The kingdom of the lost men and angels will also endure to pay tribute unwillingly to the eternal justice of God. However, we may reasonably seek for light here below of them, there are as facts and ideas, psychical premonition and mental illumination according to their personal kinds and degrees incarnated. God unrolled the scroll of the world and man, He gives diverse readings of it through coming amongst us as Christ, and through human reason studying all. He will roll it up again into Heaven and then say to the good, "Well done," to the wicked "Depart." One reading of man and the world is given within a very restricted compass in the utterance of one of the greatest Irish poets, Aodhagan Ó Rahilly. But restriction is one of the phases of the human mind, akin to concentration in thought, which, on the other hand, is capable of an all-encompassing expansion in the white and red light of truth and action in the universe of the Truth which is God, One and Three. Here let us introduce the Gael of Gaels who is the subject of this effort to revive the Gaelic Nation in all its glory with whatever the Spirit of God may add to it in the future. If the borrowing is not too bold one may say that as St. Paul was a Hebrew of the Hebrews, Aodhagan Ó Rahilly was a Gael of the Gaels. It is easy to imagine the delight Aodhagan took in composing that whimsical poem on the pair of Kerry brogues presented to him by the O Donoghue of the Glen. Behind the poem as background is the trained imagination of the rustic historian along the line of this very integral tradition of the classic and the Catholic Middle Ages. The shoes are of leather from white Barbary of the South and -which the fleet of King Philip of Spain brought over the sea. They are fit to be brought out in public because made from the hide torn off the white cow of Greek myth. Whether he is play-acting or confused in his memory he mixes up two different myths and confounds Phoebus with Zeus, who is the real jealous subject of these myths. The bristle for the hemp was made from the beautiful feather bristle of Thuis that the children of Tuireann imported for Lughaidh lúthmhar láidir. Neither Achilles nor Ajax had the like of them. Bróga bfhearra níor cheapadar daimhe. The awl that pierced the hide was fashioned in seven hundred years tempering with the guile of Vulcan. On brink of Acheron grew the black hemp spun by hags of Atropos. Darius the Persian and Alexander the Greek his conqueror, had them fitted on them. Caesar had to yield them up when he was murdered. Failbhe, Lir, Bobhdearg and Balor of the Blows all possessed them. They were in the fairy mansions of Ireland. But 'twas Domhnall the polite of the race of the Glen presented him with the beautiful shoes. Osgar could run up every gap with them. Goll Mac Morna yearned for the loan of them, mar chách leis. Curoi, Cuchullain, Meadhbh, Niall Glundubh, Conall Cearnach, all had them for a spell. And why wouldn't they appear on the plain of Clontarf where Dunlaing, if he could tie their thongs and fasten them on him, could have saved Murchadh from the slaughter? Yes, there is a sigh of humorous content, after all this wandering in myth, legend and history, in the ceangal:
Is togha seóide mo bhróga is ní cosmhuil riú puinn 
Is cóir iad ar ródaibh na ngorm úr liog 
Fóirfidh mo bhrónsa, cé doilbh dubhach sinn, 
Gur toghadh damhsa le Dómhnall ó Donnachadha buinn. 
(My shoes are choicest jewels, there is nothing like them, they are an ornament on roads of the freshcut blue stones; it is a relief to my sorrow, however sad and wretched I am, that Donal O Donoghue has chosen soles for me). There is shame here and pauperisation, but there is no shame but glory in such thanksgiving of the artist heart to the chief, de phréimh na Fleasca, O'Donoghue of the Glen. We know really nothing about Aodhagan Ó Rahilly. History does not tell us the date of his birth or his death. Tradition and his poetry must be relied on for all we know of him. Thus he merges more powerfully into the general scheme of the big things of all history. (Not that we can tritely put him in any scheme.) Over and over again he prays to Christ and the Blessed Trinity in his poems. Ar Ard-Mhac De's ar thréan na Trionóide... Agallaim Aon-Mhác Dé ar Ghaoidhil dfhóirithin ... Guidhim an Trionóid fiormhór naomhtha . . . Aisog do Ghaodhalaibh déin a Chríost a n-am. In his poverty he is one with Christ-Gach aicme 'an choip ler mhaith mo shórd mar táid gan chion. Thug dealbh fós mé ar easbaidh bróg 'on tsráid indiu. The transcendence of the Church he knows only in the suffering Church of Ireland, gan cléir gan órd, i bpéin go mór, without clergy or friars and in great pain. In such suffering he and she are one with God. - A Dhia dfhuiling creidhill is rian-lot an daill. Sé Dia do chruthuigh an saoghal slán. 
The third great fact-that history is ordered by God and directed to His own final end - is acknowledged by Aodhagan in that Gaelic tradition which longed for freedom through the help of a foreign power that would be some day strong enough for Seán Buidhe, though his foreign power must constitute the Kingdom of Ireland again which is the dream of ainnir shéimh dar bh'ainm Éire, a súile siar ag súil le Dia. "There is no relief ever to draw near to her till the Merchant's Son come back." In all that longing for freedom and for the comfort of a home once more and leisure to compose, we have the medieval man's faith and the Irishman's 'Welcome be the Will of God' expressed in beautiful verse: Go bhfiadfaidh sé sléachtadh dod Dhia-Thoil, a Radharc! Though this is a prayer for another who is afflicted it gives us the daily reflection of O'Rahilly's heart-"that he may be able- to bow down, O Vision, before Thy Divine Will." In all that belief in the power of God to tum the wheels of history, the prophecies of the bards constitute the source of inspiration: Tig an pápa's an chléir chirt i láthair an éirligh, Ina láimh dheis bíonn céir agus coinneal; 
Tig bláth ar na géagaibh is dfháiltigh an spéir ghlan. 
Roimh ghrása Mhic Dé do theacht chughainn; 
Tig an fánuidhe gan aon locht (cé raidhtear leis bréaga) 
Na lánchumas caomhghlan dá ionad; 
Báidhfidh se an tréada thug táir agus béim do 
Is ni ráidhim-se ann súd aon rud na choinnibh. 
The tradition and heart of the downtrodden Gael clung to that message and it gave him the power to endure and to conquer. But the key to Aodhagan Ó Rahilly is this: Do ghlac biodhgadh is fearg bháis. Ó Rahilly is a poet in a rage of wrath manifested in biting bitter sarcasm of a simplicity of style that carries all Ireland's tradition of Catholicity and politics. The questions may be put: Is his anger just? Is it only personal? What we can acknowledge first is this echo of Keating accepted as Aodhagan's act of humility for the whole nation: Is dearbh gurab 'é gach éigean íogcorach 
Ganguid is eitheach, claon is díoth cómhaill 
Gan ceangal le chéile, acht réabadh rinn-sgórnach, 
Do tharraing ar Éirinn fraoch an Ríogh Chómhachtaigh.
 
(In sooth it is every violence of injustice on our part 
Deceit and falsehood and treachery and dishonesty, 
Our want of union, and, instead, the tearing of each other's throats, That have drawn down on Erin the rage of the Mighty King.) 

That does not prevent him from scourging the oppressor, while he utters the prayer: I beseech the Only Son of God to grant relief to the Gaels. Another question we might put: Is Ó Rahilly a critic of art? He criticises men true or traitorous, personalities and policies, in a broad way. But is he conscious of criticism as we know it in this modem age? The direct answer is: No. Yet in his poem of lamentation for Diarmuid Ó Leary of Killeen, the bard of Sliabh Luachra shows us his acquaintance with the apparatus of criticism when he sings:
San bhfeallsamh bhí teann mar Scótus 
Na Fhranncach gan cham na chomhdaibh 
I labharthaibh 's i dteangthaibh eoluis 
'S i mbeartaibh rann do mheabhraigh Hómer 

I bhforustacht do b'é Solomon sólus, 
'S i bhfilidheacht do chuir cuisti ar Óvid, 
San neart do thug Samson sgóp do 
Le nar leag na fáthaigh mhóra. 

Having no material with which to judge, and also because the praise of his friend's learning and skill is overdone we cannot take that eulogy quite seriously. Yet when we hear an old-age pensioner in Kerry composing his own song on the glories of Ireland and singing it beside the fire we see the still richer possibilities in the house of the noble in Aodhagan's own time. Later in that poem we can sense the truth of this description: "Where the learned, the clergy, and strollers were wont to be; Where the poets and bards of the country were : In the princely mansion of thy father beside Gleannamhair, of the Eoghanacht, My woe while I live that my hero lies beneath a stone! The company, not fatigued by the revel, rehearsing witty compositions of past generations in Gaelic tales about the wisdom of the heroes." There is a profound change since Ó Rahilly's days but still we revive our courts of poetry. What is an excellent example of this sense of criticism is the fact that he changed over from the schools that had grown pedantic to make himself the new voice of Ireland and in the process changed Irish metrics. We cannot hope except in Ó Rahilly's scripture to see the change from the previous age to his own. And strange to say much less may we measure the full harvest of our own feature after an experience of twenty years. Minute prophecy like "We cannot revive the Gaelic Nation" is only a wail without any inspiration and without any reliance on God. Let us take the confession of the Frenchman, Andre Gide. If at the age of sixty, Gide could say about his work Andre Walter, which he wrote at twenty, that it was time for him to learn all over again how to write French, we have in this a contemporary example of what happened to Ó Rahilly in his own life. Fowlie, in his profound study of The Spirit of France, speaks of the whole psychological and religious problem of "man the artist" as the most tenacious literary theme for our century. The French nation suffered the defeat of '70, had its revenge in the Allied victory of '18 and again suffered the disaster of' 40. Irish sentiment was with France in the '70 and Marshal McMahon. We don't know very clearly what we think as a nation to-day. We gaze out over Europe and the world like a hurler on a boggy grand stand. In Ó Rahilly's day Spain loomed much more largely over the Irish sky. And the Kerry shore seethed with possibilities. Perhaps O'Rahilly did not know in the beginning of that 18th century that the power of Spain was passing rapidly to give way to the power and culture of France with the seeds being sown of the rending of Christendom. We can see what the experience of the tearful world could plough up in France or Spain or Ireland, and how rich the harvests could be in the soul and expression of the gifted literary man. But the artist at any particular point in history is possible because while he is engaged in solitary contemplation ten thousand without a name are toiling or suffering to enrich his thought. And it is they who give him an audience. But God is and sustains all, tolerating evil and doing good. Ó Rahilly was trained in the smile of the chieftain in the Big House and in some hard school of poets of traditional Irish aristocracy. He was an adherent of the family of lineage and of the great personality as governor, preferably the soldier, the noble, with a following. He accepted the monk and his monastery, the friar and his friary, the bishop and his church. He knew all these institutions as great and comparatively solid and good though long harried. We see Ó Rahilly's mind and the decline and fall that tempered the new instrument he forged in two poems he composed about the same chieftain. They are numbered XV and XVI in Fr. Dinneen's Irish Texts 
Society volume (2nd Edn., 1911) of Aodhagan Ó Rahilly's poems: Ar bhás Ui Cheallacháin, 24th day of August, 1724. He shows in the first poem his profound knowledge of the genealogy of the Irish families which was the stock-in-trade of the schools of poetry. He does not hesitate in their tradition, with historic simultaneous presence of mind, to link them with the Bible. (It is interesting to note that Don Juan Ó Callaghan of Spain is at present the accepted descendant of the princely house.) Ó Ceallachan besides being Son of Éibhear, Son of Mileadh the powerful, the hero who was a sedate high king of Spain, was also "Son of Magog the gentle, son of the sprightly Japeth, son of Noah, who found protection and shelter in the ark, Son of Lamech whose life was long on earth, Son of Metusalem who was long in mortal shape-Son of Adam the wise, who conceived great evil." We may laugh at this living in the Scripture world, but we laugh because we have shallower and poorer conventions, because the English-speaking world on the whole has given up belief in the Word of God. And we smile the superior smile of scientism and so-called knowledge, and so-called criticism. That long litany of names which Professor Corkery has lifted into new illustration for us, following the lead of Eoin MacNeill, is prefaced with such simple language and thought and solemn music as: Sgoth na Muimhneach sínte ar feóchadh Leannán Banba, caraid na ngeócach, A n-aon tsúil, a rún, a ndóchas 'S a gcu ghleaca le namhaid do móradh. 
Thug a bhás ar bhráthraibh beó-ghoin, Ár gan áiriomh dfhás ar órdaibh, Ciorrbhadh cléire feuch gur fhógair
Do bhrigh na storma rithios ar neólaibh. 
Yes, the grandeur and the misery of man are here as well felt as ever a Pascal felt them for the individual great struck down in death. But here there is no break in the unity, as of the middle ages, beginning to be· lost, a note that sounds so clearly in the time of Pascal. The old world surges through the Kerry beggarmari's lines knitting together castle and abbey, armed man and poet and the clouds of heaven as they race in from the Atlantic: do bhrigh na storma rithios ar neólaibh. The genealogist must have felt, however, through re-reading his text, perhaps, or from out his meditation after reading some recent manuscript, that these far depths of humanity and its descent were too remote, that the world was changing. So he composed another marbhna ar bhás an fhir chéadna, leaving out the flourishing tree of genealogy. This we must give in full in Fr. Dinneen's prose translation: A bitter news that has sorely wounded my heart and sent thousands into banishment for ever; the. bees' wax and pearl of the men of Munster has been shot down by the cunning contrivance of death; their ' cedar, their Caesar, the head of their race, their own ornament, their own constant sword, the beauty of mien to all, as all acknowledged their true prince, their beautiful light by day and night. The furious demons of the air and the magicians cannot be restrained in their fury; Thetis lie§ stretched beneath fiery waves, and it is not unseemly for her spouse to accompany her Phlegon is without hearing and Triton, Mighty Mars holds a spear in his hand, Phaethon leaps beyond his track, while a wounding venomous thorn pierces his heel. My tears as a seal on the prince-covering stone, trivial is the tribute ever to boast of; if I do not pour out the generous blood of my heart on the clay-coverlet of the matchless chieftain; the flash of Erin's power was this noble, her tallest root-oak in blossom; his death has been my undoing, and has laid prostrate hundreds like me. Heaven and earth have torn themselves asunder, the low has fiercely swallowed up the high, Typhon lay in soft lovely sleep, until he leaped on the shore in the absence of the tide; the black bluemouthed sea-serpents, all ceased from their swimming that the gods might hear what royal prince of the noble race of Milesius had died. Cliodhna from the white fairy rock said that it was the noble warrior of bright Clonmeen, a royal chieftain of Cashel, a high branch, the noble O Callaghan and his seed, the protecting robe of Balla in the day of distress protecting with the vigour of his strength and sword, who lies beside the Lee, in the south, cold in death; O bitter piercing sting of death to me, said she. The chalk-white Aoibhill screamed in grief for Domhnall, she poured her tears on the waves, Jove started and was seized by a deadly frenzy, and angels tearfully lamented; the fair Island gave him, as he dwelt in a beautiful glorious city, large estate-lands and rents,: his soul is amid the saints in high esteem, and this is better as a possession than worlds. 
The Epitaph. O gray marble stone, beneath which the beloved of the land of the Gael lies low, should someone inquire what chieftain is this who is treasured beneath thy side, reply readily nor delay in discoursing on the tidings, the true O Callaghan and the son of the O Callaghan is he. 
Fr. Dinneen points out that the plan of this elegy on Ó Callaghan reminds one a little of the Gallus of Virgil and the Lycidas of Milton. The classic mythology spoils it for most students nowadays perhaps. Yet for us it gives a savour to the Irish that places it gracefully in three worlds, the world of Latin and Greek and their revival, the world of the druid and the fairy, and then the real world which appreciated the beauties of house and lands only to place them in their eternal setting. What an intimate picture is that:
Agus aingil go deórach ag caoi; An Ghealinse i gcathair bhreagh ghlórmhar Thug fearann stáit mór do gus cíos; I measg naomh atá a anam fá mhór-chion 'S is fearra mar lón do ná an saoigheal. 
The fair island may have been the Great Island on which Cobh is situated and the folk record of the death of one of the Barrymores comes to mind when he is said to have wailed as he lay dying, looking out on his gardens: O my fair gardens, how can I leave you? A dramatic bombshell of that kind would enliven O'Rahilly's poem, a modern would say, but it would spoil its old-world dignity in outlook. It would falsify also the religious signification, because the Catholic does not argue as the Protestant did over and over again that wealth and success in business, as well for individuals as nations, or "progress," as they called it, are an argument for the truth of the religion professed. Yet the true conclusion is, as it is in Ó Rahilly, that we may denounce wealth but we are not allowed to sneer at the dying. If his soul is received by the saints, that is better than worlds of wealth. Sober conclusion, but just true. What we have concluded from these two poems is that they show within the work of the poet a new outlook that is verified in the choice the Ollamh made to swing away from the ancient to the modern method in poetry. Thereby Aodhagan assisted if he did not inaugurate the rich folk-stream of poetry that has not dried up but works away underneath to emerge and join with the sea of Gaedhilge that is ready to astonish our eyes. The thrill of working on Aodhagan's poetry is that you are free to conjecture while you examine him in his phrases and lines and words. We may have to add to Fr. Dinneen's account of the poet by imagining more about his sources than his editor was able to set down. We know that our Ollamh was familiar with Keating, who died about twenty years before Ó Rahilly was born. Ó Rahilly made copies of his history of Ireland, and perhaps of his other works too for all we know. He mentions " An Leabhar Muimhneach and the Holy Psalter of Cashel. There were current at the time, we are forced to acknowledge from manuscripts edited since Dinneen's herculean labour of much editing, all sorts of books like the Franciscan Archbishop Conry's Desiderius, which brought a Spanish book of devotion into Irish. The Renaissance and the Counter-Reformation both played a part in the enrichment of the tradition which was three-fourths of Aodhagan's equipment. In a study of his words a note should be made of the frequent use in Amhlaoibh Ó Suilleabhain's diary of the line about the weather: Atá ciach ar na riasgaibh 's ar shléibhtibh dubha. Humphrey was very fond of that line but the following lines reinforce the beauty: 
Is tá dianfhearg cian ar na spéarthaibh chughainn, Tá gliadar is siansa na n-eun go ciúin ... The most powerful line is: Tír do briseadh le fuirinn an Bhéarla. It is made more telling by coming at the end of a verse such as this: A land without produce or thing of worth of any kind! A land without plenty, without a stream, without a star! A land stripped naked, without shelter or boughs! And here is the line: A land broken by the English-prating band! One can hear the tearing and the rending in the words Tír do briseadh le fuirinn an Bhéarla. A land that was broken by the crew of the English language. It is an epitome of Irish history. And alas it is still true, but it has its message of challenge to all that is Irish in us. Fuireann na Gaedhilge are still in training for the run and the crash of the fighting vessels and the boarding and the hand-to-hand fight, and the victory. For that we have to feel and carry on the wrath of the poet. A study of his words would be far from tedious for one who is learning an4 even less so for the expert. He has these terms which carry the idea of philosophy. In the first edition ciallradh is a collective noun from the word for sense or wisdom, meaning a store of wisdom; fíreolas is a more general term, meaning true knowledge; sanas, a very ancient word, sainfhios, meaning special knowledge, but holding many meanings, even to Dia na Sanaise, Annunciation Day (Dinneen Dict.); rós na saoithe, the rose of the wise would give us another word in saoitheacht for wisdom to put beside that word éigse and éigseacht which the Galway men have put as name on their "Philosophy"; under this head the whole verse which follows is worthy of quotation, Do fuair Seaghán ciall Ó Dhia na céille, Caitheamh is fághail do ghnáth gan traochadh, Clú nar thím, is ná tuillfeadh céad guith. ls beo a thaise, ni marbh acht saoghal do, which is translated: John gained wisdom from 
the· God of Wisdom, giving and receiving forever without pause, fame not weak, not deserving a hundred reproaches, his spirit lives yet, one life alone is dead. Eagnaidhe is another word used for a philosopher, a priest in this case. Forustacht is a word of deep meaning though it may have only a moral sense where the poet uses it. Forus is the classic word in Keating for anything primary in learning. Forus Feasa means an introduction and forus focal, etymology. The word we have in current Irish for philosophy occurs once in the word feallsamh which in the first edition was put down as feallsacht, but now we make it feallsamhnacht. All these words tell us we are in the medieval world when philosophy was philosophy, the queen of the sciences, and when what to-day is called science was reckoned to be mere opinion, as in Plato's day. And what else is it compared to Christian philosophy? It is true there is more accuracy in measuring nowadays, but even still our solar day is not perfectly accurate, and so we have to make the merely proximate correction of a leap year. Whereas we are absolutely certain that the soul is spiritual and can be trained to all kinds of sanctity at one with the knowledge and sanctity of God. Which is the more interesting? Ó Rahilly's world or ours? While we have that fine tradition stirring us as background to the poet's work we have also that fierce hatred, even against the unjust, which seems unchristian and which is unchristian too, measured by the real standards. Here it is to shock us with its starkness. 
Beneath thy maw, O stout stone, lies a reprobate who came across the Shannon,· A serpent who embezzled the pledges of every poor ruined helpless man; A wicked upstart who betrayed every graceful maiden who came his way; · Lips skilled in pronouncing oaths against the Pope. 
Wicked steward of a barony, who plundered deceitfully the MacCarthys, · And the fair seat · of the warrior from the Laune which is called Parthus,  
As reward he has got hell of the damned in the world beyond; he has gone there, With six scarce feet of the Killarney graveyard. 
That was penned on the death of the pervert, Murty O Griffin, "for whom death was too long in waiting." It has been said that the Jews and the Irish make the best journalists because their pens drip vitriol-the rage that is in their hearts so sorely oppressed. But English is too feeble, especially the lisping super-refined English of to-day. You need the Hebrew or the Gaelic. Cuingiv gu lowm fawdh vown u ghairbhlac vore Un musgaire fowlsu dhu veeowrig gonagid iss sgo Leh dilihiv nung-owl huug sgowru er Vonubuh iss thore Iss gu vekimnuh an thowm veg fawn sowi'l suh uh moren dhaw fourr. And here is the tame English of it: O great strong stone hold tightly beneath thy foot  The false tyrant who planned deceit and servitude . Who brought destruction and rout on Banba by English laws And may we see the time when all of his race who survive shall lie beneath stones like thee. We shiver when we hear of the curse of Cromwell. It makes us think of the hatred the curse of Cromwell ground into the Irish heart. It makes us hear an echo of the great Bible language. "May they be put to shame and confusion ·Who seek to take my life. May they fall back with dishonour Who would fain see my ruin. May they at once meet their shame Who cry to me Ha! Ha! " (Ps. 69. Mgr. Boylan's Trans.) or fiercer ,still: "May their table become a snare before them And a requital and a stumbling block. May their eyes be darkened that they see not! And bend Thou their back at all times! 
Pour out upon them Thy anger And let Thy fierce wrath seize them! Let their dwelling become a wilderness Let there be none to dwell in their tents! Charge them with sin upon sin And let them not enter into Thy justice. May they be blotted out from the Book of . Life And may they not be written down with the just" But the Lord has said: It was said to them of old . .. but I say: Love your enemies. When the realist critic harps on the fact that the Irish poets were "aristocratic" in outlook and "royalist" in politics, he is calling attention to what is a fact. But if he intends by this to depreciate the Irish poets and to give the republicans of our days a sly dig, we are still imperturbable. O Rahilly and the ages· before him would easily understand a flag raised aloft and inscribed "Pro rege et patria pugno," just as easily as they would understand the flag with the Cross and the inscription "In hoc signo vinces." All these cries of a past age may appear old-fashioned to the modern varicose brain. Nevertheless anyone with understanding and a certain sense of history and a wide experience of human nature from reading the Bible and personal observation can see there was just as much realism in our Jacobite cult as there was in any political movement in history. The Irish poets knew nothing else but a monarchy, and they were encouraged by the Papacy from the Confederation of Kilkenny onwards. To the philosopher, indifferent to names, all things are possible. And so all realists may meet. The Gaelic State and Nation still stand and O Rahilly, Celt of the Celts, might yet awaken the ancient echoes in the far-flung Celtic Empire. When we examine at closer quarters Aodhagan's lyrical contribution, while noting that he is the Irish parallel to that Jeremiah, who was a defeatist to his contemporaries, but who really only foresaw that the Jews were going into a long captivity, then we can concede him the bitterness and the grim humour of satire. The gentleness and the fierceness of a Pearse were his, but it may be asked had. he his foot on the threshold of real mysticism and already within the ante-chamber which is the mysticism of the poet. We think he had. He has not shown the real love of the mystic but the hard wave of common charity. is there and the brightness of Catholic vision, while there is the reserve of: 'S fios bile ná cuirfead im laoithibh le fior-uamhain. The instrument of his mysticism has mostly a sweeping metaphor for sign. The folk of Fodhfa are sick at heart because the groves of trees, that is the institution of chieftainry, no longer shelter them. And, "Banba is in pain without a consort, wedded though she be." This strong image of the maid of Erin yoked to churlish Bull, instead of her true king, recurs again and again, and gains power from our memory that it is a biblical image of much deeper import. Like the genealogies, this is another example of how this Irish poetry takes the inspired Hebrew as a quite natural source. Vision as the dwelling-house of the poet and the saint 'is an old idea in Irish literature, that has its origin in the dealings of man with God and as a technique comes from Virgil. The whole world is familiar with it in Dante and we find it in many an Irish legend. It became a commonplace cliché after Aodhagan's time in Gaelic folk poetry. It has not, however become commonplace in Ó Rahilly. Ó Rahilly's is at times an Aisling Mheabhail and it has undertones of blackness cymballing across the brightness. The cloying sweetness of later aisling verse cannot be attributed to Aodhagan. There is concentrated power in his phrases that witness to the sincerity and inner character of his meditation. And then there is drama in the grip of it. He is, as it were, a modern and a poet of all time in that image of the noise of the powerful wave that keeps him awake down by the fierce Kerry coast - the very same wave whose thunders echo in the eloquence of O Connell – 
A Thonn so thíos is aoirde céim go h-árd, 
Meabhair mo chinn claoidhte ót bhéiceach tá; 
Cabhair dá dtigeadh arís go hÉireainn bháin 
Do ghlam nách binn do dhingfinn féin at bhrághaid. 
Thou wave below, of highest repute, loud-voiced 
The senses of my head are overpowered with thy bellowing; 
Were help to come again to fair Ireland 
I'd choke thy discordant clamour down thy throat. That violence and tenderness that exist side by side in our bard show that his meditation went deep. Sometimes the blackness is changed to brightness as when he sees once more the youths carousing and the punch and brandy flowing there where the foreigner has replaced the generous McCarthy blood, and then he gives us a phrase that has rung clear in' the heart of the Gael and expressed Easter for us again in times Aodhagan would have longed to see. Do mheasas am aigne as fós am chroidhe 
An marbh ba mharbh gur beó do bhí. 
His anger is never assuaged for long. 
“A distressing sorrow has spread over my old hardened heart, since the foreign demons have come amongst us in the land of Conn." "Dwarfish churls ply the sword of the three fates, hacking the dead crosswise from head to foot." In that lament of the Three Children of Cronin we have a contrast in his gentle mood of mourning. . Do ghéis an Ráth Mhór, do réabadh a seól Do léanadh a séan sin, do phléasc tigh an bhróin... 
Three fair vines, three simple doves · Three prime apples from a fresh bough, that were loyal in their dwelling, Three fair guides of the house, who refused not one in want Their three slender waists, their smooth cheeks, have filled my heart with sorrow. The lyric Gile na Gile has become so popular as almost to seem hackneyed. Yet there is one aspect of it in line with his mysticism that may have been overlooked. It expresses the essence of poetry to which there is no limit if you look on poetry as absolute reality, as Canon Sheehan reminds us one German poet did, or as Wordsworth talks about it in his essay on poetry as emotion recollected in tranquillity. This is as stirring a description as Boethius' vision of philosophy, the balm of the poetic soul: The Brightness of Brightness I saw on the way in solitude Crystal of crystal, her blue eyes tinged with green, Melody of melody, her speech not morose with age, The ruddy and white appeared in her glowing cheeks. But Ó Rahilly never remains sufficiently long in his gentle meditation in loneliness without finishing in the rage that is characteristic of him. For this is eighteenth-century Ireland. If he is gentle seldom and rage is ever surging in his heart hope lingers on even against hope. The woeful contrast between the absolute of the vision and the sordidness of: The bright fond kind fair soft-lipped gentle maiden Held by a horned malicious croaking yellow clown with a black troop: is devastating and more convincing regarding the distress of the nation than the magnificence of the greatest stylist of to-day. Rage has its root in wrong, and national rage in national wrong, and in the mind of Aodhagan that wrong was of long standing. But in the last stanza of the last poem he ever penned, he tells us that the MacCarthys were chieftains over his ancestors from times immemorial Na flaithe fá raibh mo shean roim éag do Chríost .. The princes under whose hand my ancestors were before Christ died. The year of the Lord is the mark in the chronology of Ireland and her poet. In Irish fashion he merely hints, facing death, that the death of Christ is his hope of glory. Who was nigh when Aodhagan's noble body was lowered into the graveyard of the friars. in Muckross? Who mourned the proud heart that loved his people so well when he was gathered like a prophet to his fathers? We know not. He is like a scripture figure coming out of a forgotten time and forgotten by ·an age, but still speaking with the voice of a trumpet in the poem which stands as his epitaph: 
I will not cry for help, till I am put into a narrow coffin, And I swear, if I were to cry, it would be no nearer to me, Our whole support, the strong-handed one of the race of Eoghan His strength is undermined, and his vigour gone to decay. 
My brain trembles as a wave, my chief hope is gone,· My entrails are pierced through, venomous darts penetrate my heart, Our land, our shelter, our woods, our fair neighbourhood, In pledge for a penny to a band from the land of Dover. . 
The Shannon, the Liffey and the tuneful Lee are become discordant; The stream of the black water, of Brick, of the Bride and the Boyne, The waist of Lough Derg and Tonn Toime are turned red Since the knave completely won the game from the crowned king. (i.e., William III succeeding James II) Frequent is my moan and I am ever shedding tears, Heavy is my woe, and a man I am under injustice, No tune comes near me as I weep on roads But the squeal of the hog which cannot be wounded by dart throwing. (i.e., Tore Waterfall in Killarney, 'tore' meaning boar).  Because of the great ruin that has overtaken · the race of the proud kings, Waters plough their way from my temples with, heavy sound. 
I will cease now; death is nigh unto me · Since the warriors of the Laune of Lein and of the Lee have been laid low, I will fallow the beloved among heroes to the grave Those princes under whom were my ancestors before the death of Christ.
