" To Fore next let us go, That valley lying low; And see the rill That through the hill To turn the mill Saint Pechin caused to flow." Translation of an ancient Gaelic rhyme. 
Nestling at the foot of the steep hill known as the Ben of Fore lies the tiny town, once fortified by walls of which the ruinous gateways at either extremity remain. The town, which up to the Act of Union with England, returned two burgesses to the Irish parliament, contains the ruins of an ancient Celtic church, the chapel-tomb of the anchorite, of which more anon, and the celebrated monastery. These three principal features have caused the place to be described as " at once a fortress an abbey, and a tomb." Fore (the anglicised form of its Gaelic name, Gleann Fobhair, or Glen of the Stream) with the neighbouring Lough Lene, or “ Lake of Learning,” first rose to fame under Saint Fechin, who in A.D. 630 founded his monastery there, having, as the ancient legends relate, been admonished by an angel to build it on that spot. The place would seem to have been steeped in an atmosphere of the miraculous. Colgan-a seventeenth-century gleaner of early Irish manuscripts then still extant- relates that St. Columba "through the spirit of prophecy " appointed that spot for Fechin “who in after times should glorify God in an extraordinary manner " and this " even many years before he was born " ; that Stellan, a disciple of Columba, saw in a vision "the whole valley of Fore filled with beautiful white birds, and in the midst a column of fire reaching to the very heavens ; “ and that St. Nathy of Achonry had also a vision of St. Fechin laying the foundation of his monastery at Fore. By A.D. 639 St. Fechin had assembled about him a community of monks numbering three hundred, and this religious house quickly became renowned as a seat of learning, containing upwards of two thousand five hundred students and continued so until the Anglo-Normans came to Ireland. Now the famous '' Wonders of Fore '' are seven; and well does the writer remember how, when she first came as a bride to the Emerald Isle, the old family retainer who acted as custodian of the ruins, was wont to recite them to her in Irish, afterwards translating them into English for her benefit. And even as he had been taught their fame as a boy, so it had been handed down for centuries before his time. 
I. The monastery in a bog. II. The mill without a race (i.e., without water power). 
III. The water tl1at flows underground. IV. The tree that has three branches. V. The water that never boils. VI. The stone raised by S. Fechin's prayers. VII. The anchorite in a stone. 
I. The monastery in a bog. It is indeed a marvel that the extensive buildings of Fore Abbey should have stood so firmly for centuries, for not only does the whole surrounding area consist of bog-land, but in earlier ages it must have been the bed of a lake, as is evidenced by the " water gate" in the wall encircling the abbey, and by the fact that in 1860 an ancient anchor was found embedded in the bog. Yet, save where Oliver Cromwell's artillery damaged the masonry, the walls stand as proudly as ever. Probably the correct solution of the mystery is given by Sir Henry Piers (" A Choregraphicall Description of the County Westmeath,'' A.D. 1682) :-" This monastery is said to be built in a bog, and so it is, but founded on a firm spot of ground which it wholly possesseth." II. and III. The Mill without a race and The water that flows underground. The monks, finding it too laborious to grind sufficient grain for so large a community in a hand-quern (say the old chronicles), the abbot Fechin promised to provide a mill to be worked by waterpower. The millwright whose task it was to construct it complained to the saint that there was no water at a level high enough to turn its wheel. But Fechin replied, "The Lord is powerful to procure water for His servants " ; and going to the shore of Lough Lene, about a mile distant on the further side of the Ben, he struck the base of the hill with his crozier, and immediately water flowed underground in a copious stream, issuing by the mill which ever afterwards worked by means of this " race." It is an undoubted fact that water does issue from an underground source flowing from the direction of the lake, under an intervening hill, and issuing close to the high road, as may be seen to this day. The mill, of which only the ruins now survive, was anciently regarded as a holy place, and became the scene of later miracles, as, for example, one recorded by Giraldus Cambrensis, worked in his own time, during the Anglo-Norman invasion of Ireland. Hugh de Lacy, he says, with his army, passed a night at Fore, and finding that his soldiers had stolen some corn stored in the mill, he commanded them to replace it. This was done "except for a small quantity of oats which two of his men had privately set before their chargers. One of these chargers went mad in the night and dashed out his brains, and next morning, as the master of the other horse was jeering at his comrades for restoring the corn, he suddenly fell dead at the side of Hugh de Lacy, in the sight and to the wonder of the greater part of the army.'' IV. The tree that has three branches. This tree, which stands in an adjoining meadow, is believed to bear always three branches, no more, no less, in honour of the Holy Trinity. Tradition says that if ever one branch decays or is blown off, another will grow in its place, but never more than one, so that it remains trifurcate. The importance attached by the early Irish saints to the doctrine of the Triune Godhead when teaching their pagan flocks is familiar to all in the legend of St. Patrick and the trefoil shamrock, and it may well be that St. Fechin utilized a three-branched tree for the same purpose, and that a tradition of sanctity has lingered about it in consequence. V. The water that never boils. The legend attaching to this would appear to be lost in the mists of antiquity, but tradition asserts that water drawn from a spring which is overhung by the three-branched tree can never be brought to the boil. Ill-luck is said to overtake any who attempt the feat. The writer had too much respect for the feelings of her tenantry to tempt fate in defiance of their prejudices ; but rumour has it that an occasional tourist has tried conclusions with a kettleful, yet has never succeeded in the task ! VI. The stone raised by St. Fechin's prayers. This huge block of stone, called by an eminent eighteenth-century traveller, Dr. Dodwell, " as perfedly Cyclopean in character as any monument to be seen in Greece," six feet long, three feet high and of immense thickness, forms the lintel of the low west door of the parish church built by St. Fechin. The legend runs that the workmen who were building the church could not with their united strength lift it into its destined place, but going away to their breakfast they found on their return that the saint had by a miracle lifted it into its place, where it remains to this day. The stone has the ancient symbol of a cross within a circle engraved in the centre. Giraldus Cambrensis, writing in the twelfth century, relates that a soldier entering the church at Fore, " knocked his forehead against the stone that has the cross upon it." To Sir Henry Piers, already quoted, this story of the saint's achievement was related as he was " discoursing with an antient dweller in the town," and it may be added that this and the tales of all the " wonders " of Fore, handed down for generations, are still told by the inhabitants. VII. The anchorite in a stone. This seventh and last " wonder " belongs to a later period than the other six; and dates from late in the sixteenth century or at any rate before 1616. It does not share the miraculous nature of its predecessors; but is highly interesting to the archaeologist. There is, in fact, a chapel having a vault beneath it, and built on to an ancient turret which communicates with the chapel by a narrow winding stairway. The tower contains one small chamber with a" squint "window looking down into the chapel, and a tiny cell leading out of it. The stair, continuing past these two small rooms, leads up to an aperture giving access to the roof. The tower-considerably more ancient than the little chapel-was probably originally a watch-tower when Fore was a fortified town, and the anchorite, finding it derelict in his time, utilized it for his cell, building his oratory beneath its sheltering walls. The great importance attached to this seventh wonder of Fore is doubtless because (according to a contemporary writer) this holy hermit, Patrick Beglen, was at that time the only anchorite left in Ireland, and his reputation for sanctity was therefore unchallenged by any rival. The vows of a '' solitary ''-a form of piety widely practised in the Middle Ages, one of the most renowned exponents of which was the venerated Dame Juliana of Norwich-oblige the occupant of the cell never to quit it when once entered, to depend for food on the offerings of the faithful, and to dig each day beneath it a portion of his or her future grave. These conditions the holy man of Fore rigidly observed, says a contemporary writer quoted by Piers. " Every day he saith Mass in his chapel, which is .... all his dwelling-house but a very small castle, where in a tall man can hardly stretch himself at length if he laid down on the floor; nor is there any passage into the castle but through the chapel. .... He is said by the natives, who hold him in great veneration for his sanctity, every day to dig or rather scrape (for he useth no other tools but his nails), a portion of his grave." He was constantly visited 
Arch of stone at Fore
Mill without a millrace
The Abbey seen from St. Fechin's Church
The Raised Stone 
Underground River 
The Clear Spring
Three Branches
Boge and Monastery
by the faithful, who deposited offerings of food at the door of his cell; and he had besides men "called his proctors, who range all the counties in Ireland to beg for him whom they call ' the Holy Man in the Stone.' The only recreation this poor prisoner is capable of, is to walk on his terras built over the cell wherein he lies, if he may be said to walk who cannot in one line stretch forth his legs four times." (The " terras " signifies, of course, the four square battlements of the tiny tower.) That Father Patrick was no mean sculptor is evidenced by a slab carved by his own hand to the right of the altar, representing the Crucifixion, with Our Lady and St. John on either side of the cross, skilfully and beautifully portrayed, and flanked by the following inscription : 
En ego Patricius Beglen, sacrae incola eremi Hoc lapidum tumulo condor humorque cavo Rupe sub aeria monumento et sede sacrata, Intemerato adyto tum sine labe domo. Quisquis is est ergo qui cernat hocce viator, Dicat eremicolae spiritus astra petat. A.D. 1616. 
Which may be translated thus:
Lo ! I, Patrick Beglen, dweller in the sacred hermitage Am interred beneath this pile of stones and am buried In the hollow monument under a lofty rock, and in a spot Consecrated by an inviolate sanctuary and a house without sin. Let the wayfarer, therefore, whoever he be that sees this say, May the soul of the hermit attain the stars. A.D. 1616. 
How long the anchorite lived after completing his epitaph is not known, but he had no successor, and later in the seventeenth century his cell was converted to another use, as we shall see presently. To return to Fechin, this saint continued to work stupendous miracles, and his fame spread far and wide. He healed the sick and those possessed, and even restored to life a dead queen of Ireland. In 639 A.D. Domnald II, King of Ireland, marched south with a great army into Meath in pursuance of a quarrel with the O'Nialls. The people of that province invoked the protection of the saint, who visited King Domnald as mediator, but could obtain no mercy until by a series or miracles he so influenced the king that he relented, spared the O'Niall sept, and withdrew his army. On another occasion he miraculously cured a leper in the guest-house of the abbey. This man subsequently gave his staff to the queen of King Diarmuid, a holy woman who lived on an island in Lough Lene, in gratitude for her charitable care for his wants ; and the queen having bestowed it in her tum on St. Fed.in, it was piously preserved as a relic and known as Bachall Fechin, or Fechin's staff. As late as 1837 it was still to be seen in a house near Fore. After a life of extraordinary holiness, passed in prayer and mortification, this saintly abbot was called to a happy eternity on the 20th of January, 664. He died of that dreadful pestilence the connail buidhe which raged all over Ireland at the time. The fact that his monks numbered three hundred is alluded to in a hymn for his Office : 
'' Dehinc fuit monachorum Dux et pater trecentorum.'' 
That veneration of him spread even to Scotland is shown by the name Eccle-fechan derived from Eccle (Latin, ecclesia) Fechan, i.e. church of Feehan. The subsequent history of Fore is somewhat stormy. In A.D. 848 O'Melaghlin, King of Meath, victoriously defended it against the Danes, and slew seven hundred of them. In 116o, during the wars between the Irish and their Anglo-Norman invaders, the old Celtic abbey was burned by the chieftain MacDermott, and the town raided later on by O'Connor the Red-Handed. But the powerful Norman leader, Hugh de Lacy, having subdued all Meath and Westmeath, his sons, Walter and Hugh, in 1200, had the abbey rebuilt in the splendid manner of which we see the remains to this day ; endowing it as a daughterhouse of the Benedictine foundation of St. Taurin in Normandy, and settling in it French monks from thence. Somewhat earlier, one of the knights in the invading army, one Gilbert de Nugent (whose ancestors from Nogent-sur-Marne had come to England in the train of William the Conqueror) having married Rosa, daughter of the elder Hugh de Lacy, obtained from her father the Barony of Delvin and a large slice of territory in Westmeath as her portion; and from that time the history of Fore is inextricably bound up with that of the Nugents, its overlords, much of the abbey's prosperity being due to their protection in those lawless times. 
An old French rhyming chronicle tells us: 
De Huge de Laci vus conterai Com il feffa ses barons A Gilibert de Nungent A Willam de Muset eusement Donat terres et honurs, Vaillants barons et vassaiirs. 
The Barons of Delvin grew great and powerful and owned " seven fair castles," chief of which were Castletown Delvin, Clonyn Castle was the seat of their descendants until 1922, when the property was sold. In 1436 Edward III laid a tax on all goods brought to Fore market, to pay for building a stone wall '' for the protection of the English, the Irish enemy having thrice burned the town ! '' At the spoliation of the monasteries under Henry VIII and Edward VI, Fore suffered with the rest ; and in 1588, at its final dissolution, the abbey lands were granted by Elizabeth to Christopher Nugent, 14th Baron Delvin. The curse of Oliver Nugent, last abbot of Fore, fell upon his sacrilegious kinsman, the punishment invoked of Heaven being that no lord of Delvin should be succeeded by his son. This doom was literally fulfilled for many subsequent generations, the succession passing to grandsons, brothers or nephe1ws down to the time of the 6th Earl of Westmeath. In 1607 Richard Nugent, 15th Baron Delvin, a hot-headed youth, took part in a conspiracy with the Earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnell against the English Government. For this he was imprisoned in Dublin Castle, but escaped to London, and voluntarily surrendered to King James the First in 1608. That monarch magnanimously pardoned him, took him into favour at court, and created him Earl of Westmeath. He married Lady Jane Plunket, daughter of the 9th Earl of Killeen and sister to the first Earl of Fingall, known from her miserly habits as " Jenny the Scraper." For his loyal refusal to join in the rebellion the Cromwellians in 1641 threatened the earl's life, and he, being aged and infirm, fled from Clonyn Castle with his countess under an escort of forty horse sent by Ormonde for his protection. They were, however, attacked by a thousand soldiers of the rebel army near Athboy, and forced to yield. The rebels dragged the aged countess and her gentlewomen from their coach, stripped and ill-treated them in a most shameful manner, massacred the servants, seized the money and plate, and damaged the houses and lands to the value of £20,000. The earl died the same year from the fatigue and hardship undergone, and was succeeded by his grandson, Richard, as 16th baron and 2nd earl (his son Christopher, who married a daughter of the Earl of Antrim, having predeceased him, in fulfilment of the abbot's curse). He, too, suffered at the hands of Cromwell, but surviving those dangerous times was at the Restoration much favoured by Charles the Second. Many of the lands seized by Cromwell were in 1666 restored to him. He rebuilt his residence at Clonyn, and in 1680 he repaired the anchorite's oratory at Fore, long derelict, and appropriated it as a family mausoleum. To this day may be seen the stone over the chapel-door, on which are carved a cockatrice (the Nugent crest) surmounting an earl's coronet, and this inscription :
" I, Richard Nugent, Earl of Westmeath, doe take this chapel and castle for the burying-place and pious use of myself and my successors. Anno Domini 1680." 
He died in 1684, having seen the curse again fulfilled, for his son, Christopher, who marred the Duke of Ormond's niece, predeceased him. Thomas, 18th baron and 4th earl, fought bravely for King James II against the Dutch usurper, and when, in the touching words of the Jacobite Lament, 
all is done that man can do and all is done in vain, 
his successor, following the court to St. Germains, entered the French king's service and became a major-general of the famous regiment of " Nugent's Horse," in the Irish Brigade celebrated in song and story. He married Margaret, daughter of the Count of Molza in the Duchy of Modena, and died in Brabant, a Jacobite exile, in 1754· His son, Thomas, sixth earl, seems to have made friends with the de facto king, as he returned to his estates. His eldest son was killed in a duel. George Thomas John, eighth earl, who married Lady Emily Cecil, daughter of the first Marquis of Salisbury, was created Marquis of Westmeath in 1822, and with him died out the direct succession, for his son, Lord Delvin, died in childhood. His daughter, Lady Rosa Nugent, inherited his estates, but not the title. The marquisate became extinct, and the earldom has passed to the younger branch of Nugent of Pallas, descending from a brother of the fourth earl, on whom James II bestowed the post-revolution title of Baron Riverstown. Lady Rosa married Fulke, first Lord Greville (a scion of the noble house of Warwick), and their youngest son, the Hon. Patrick Greville-Nugent, Wd.S the last Nugent owner of Clonyn Castle, Delvin and Fore. Lord Greville dismantled the old castle of Clonyn, where his wife's ancestors had dwelt for eight hundred years, and built a magnificent pile on a site near it. A celebrated feature of the park at Clonyn is a grove of enormous yew trees, said to be a thousand years old. Like many old Irish families, the Nugents possess their banshee, and the writer can truthfully aver that she has heard this spirit's eldritch scream before several deaths in the family, always sounding outside the windows, and apparently issuing from the moat surrounding the castle. She has heard it sometimes in the stillness of night, sometimes in broad daylight, and never has the death of a near relation failed to ensue. Even the dogs in the room have heard it, and have jumped up howling, and evincing every sign of terror. This account of Fore and its owners may be fitly brought to a close with the dramatic story of the curse of Hugh Reilly, clerk of Fore, which was laid in the early part of the last century, on the last Lord Westmeath of the elder line, grandfather of the last heir of Clonyn. In the days when sheep-stealing was a crime punishable by death, Reilly was unjustly condemned to be hanged for an offence of which he solemnly swore he was innocent. (The " informer" is alas ! often ready to indulge personal spite by laying accusations against the object of his hatred.) Reilly's aged mother walked the six long Irish miles from Fore to Clonyn to beg Lord Westmeath to obtain a reprieve. The marquis was absent from home at the time, but Lady Westmeath promised to intercede on his return. She did so, but without success, for her husband, a man of fiery temper- to this day the oldest tenants speak of " th' owld marquis in his tantrums !"-resented her interference, so far forgetting himself as to deal her a blow, which the haughty daughter of the Cecils never forgave. As Lord Lieutenant of the county there is no doubt that had he exerted his influence at Dublin Castle, he could have obtained a reprieve ; however, time passed, and the unfortunate man's sentence was duly carried out. But as he mounted the gallows, his poor old widowed mother standing beneath, Hugh Reilly once more asserted his innocence, and laid his solemn curse on '' the lord '' and all his descendants for seven generations. A Ballad of Hugh Reilly was written, and still sung by the people within recent years; and the affair became proverbial, as evidenced by a verse from a song relating to other sufferers : 
They swore that they were innocent, Although they'd suffered sore; Like Murphy, Ford and Gilligan, And Reilly , clerk of Fore. 
To disclose the nature of the curse and its results would be indiscreet. Suffice it to say that it is alleged to have taken effect on the old lord and his family from that very day; without intermission through the succeeding generations. 
NOTE : The castle and property of Clonyn were sold in 1922 by my late husband, the Hon. Patrick Greville-Nugent. In 1874 the anchorite's chapel at Fore was restored, re-roofed and surrounded by a low stone enclosure by the late Lady Greville of Clonyn (nee Lady Rosa Nugent), in memory of her son, Reginald, buried there. She also had a stone altar placed in it on the site where the hermit's altar must have stood, with a crucifix and candlesticks, also a stained glass window.
