Few documents in Irish are to be found among such state papers as have been published. The following, however, appears in the collection of 1661 : 
A Eamuinn, As fada liom go bfaghaim aon fhocal uaibh go h-airighthe ó táinig an buaidhirt deigionach so nar saoil (edh). As e ni bo mhian le Maoilsechlainn an criunnugh (adh) do beth aige da mad' eidir e roimhe an am, agus anois as egail liom go mbiaidh níos maille, agus ma shruighionn an dubgheimhredh, ni tincfa beo na marbh aonduine ass, agus cidh be oile et reliqua. Da mbeth impidh agam orra do chuirfidís duine anonn d'iarr(aidh) continuasion go ttig(idh) socraidhecht aimsire, no d'iarraidh ceada an definitorium cum Ministro Provinciali do dhenamh an iomlain, agus d'iarasa so do dhenamh san ccruinn (ughadh) deighion (ach) per compromissium guardianorum, agus do leigiodar tarsa é, daig dob fhearr sin do dhenamh na an tiomlfo do mhill(edh) a n-aon (fhecht) quod Deus avertat. Dob fhearr liom da sruighthidh air go mbiadh an comairle so ag Maoilsechlainn. As fesach e fein agus coluim (as truagh liom nach bfuil hall anois) gur misi tug solas roimhe so do chach san cclas as cruaidhe do bhi ag an bProbhinsi an uair do sheolas iad do Maldonato. Do cluinim go ndeachaidh Cathal go Connachta, agus Antoine roimhe sin. Cuiridh a scela chughainn agus conas atathaoi fein no muintir 
Gaotha Bera agus gach ni oile o bhel no o scribhinn. Ni ragam a leas aon dadamh ar leith do chur go Col(m) tar mo bennacht, act ma Mil leis fein scriobh(adh) go h eoin o Begl (aoich) no go Hon6rainn Riabhaigh, agus na faill (ighidh) go brath an fuagra do chur chugham a nam agus guidhidh ar an bPecth(ach). ANT. 
O Edmund, I feel it a long time since I have had any word from you especially since this last and unexpected trouble. What Maoilsheachlain wants is to have the chapter if possible beforehand and now I fear it will be later and if black winter comes no one whatever will survive, and so on. Could I but prevail upon them they would send over someone to seek an adjournment until a quieter period or to seek permission that the definitorium cum Ministro Provinciali should do the entire business. And I sought to do this in the last chapter per compromissium guardianorum and they ignored it although it were better to do so than to spoil the whole thing altogether quod Deus avertat (which God avert). I should prefer should you meet him that Maoilsheachlain should have this advice. He and Colm know (I regret that he is not over there now) that it was I who gave light (? comfort) before this to everyone on the most difficult situation which the Province ever had when I directed them to Maldonato. I hear that Cathal went to Connacht and Anthony previously. 
Send me his address and how you yourselves are or the people of Gweebarra and everything else, either by word or in writing. I don't need to send anything in particular to Colm a part from my blessing. But if he himself so desires, let him write to Eoin O Begley (?) or to Honora MacReevy and don't ever fail to send me the notice in time and pray for the sinner, Ant." 
This letter was discovered apparently in August, 1661, when Major Folliott arrested Neale MacDavid between Donegal and Barnesmore. Folliott was probably one of the Folliotts who then owned the weir at Assaroe which was the subject of a decision by the Supreme Court in 1934-the famous Brehon law fishery case. The letter was addressed to Captain Brooke, " colourably " said Folliott in the report which he wrote on 15th August, 1661, at Ballyshannon for the information of the Lords Justices at Dublin. MacDavid was brought for examination before Brooke and before he was questioned " tried to slip the Irish letter into an Irish gentleman's pocket who was present in the room, thereby increasing the suspicion against him," said Folliott. There was delay in forwarding the document to Dublin because Folliott had had to spend several days riding abroad trying to get the letter translated for the purpose of the examination, as all the local Irish were Papists and unwilling. " I send the Irish letter with the best translation that I could get made. MacDavid has confessed that he is a friar. The Irish want us very much to release the man on bail but we have decided not to do so pending orders from your lordships," said Folliott. MacDavid's examination survives. He had been in France and Flanders during the Civil War. When arrested he was on his way to Inishowen from Mayo. " The letter," said he, " was really in
tended by Richard or Anthony O'Doherty who lives in Inishowen for Edmund O'Callaher, a person wandering here and there as this examinatio doth." I have to thank that well known historian, Father Canice, O.F.M.,-the order of which Neale MacDavid was a member-for aid in identifying those mentioned in this letter. The writer was probably Father Anthony O'Doherty of Donegal, appointed guardian of the Franciscan convent of Moyne, Mayo, in 1658, and the Edmund, Father Edmund O'Gallagher. The Maoilsheachlain was probably Father Malachy Corcoran who at the time this letter was written held the important office of commissary visitator of the Irish Franciscans. One may only guess who Colm was. Colm MacDavett, then a member of the order, bears a Donegal name. Cathal cannot be traced at present. Eoin O Begley and Honora MacReevy were apparently agents in the underground system of communication then employed by the Franciscans in Ireland. The question under discussion was the holding of a chapter, then, no doubt, an urgent matter, for the affairs of the order had suffered during the Cromwellian regime. Charles II had just been restored to the throne and high hopes were being entertained of toleration of the Catholic religion, so what more natural than an effort by the Franciscans to convene a chapter ? Father Anthony seems to have questioned the wisdom of the idea, and, obviously as a temporary expedient, urged that the business of the government of the Irish province be left to the Father Provincial and the definitors (or counsellors) of the province. At the last chapter of the order, probably that held in Cavan in 1648, he had unsuccessfully advocated that control be vested in a committee of the guardian of the various houses. In the most difficult situation the province had ever had, his policy had been proved to be the proper one, as he is careful to remind Father Edmund. The reference to Maldonato is obscure. It may refer to Maldonado, a famous Jesuit theologian who died in 1583. Or it may be a code word for the chapter held in Cavan in 1648 at a most difficult period. The Earl of Ormond had so opposed the holding of this chapter as to include the name of Father Anthony in his black list because of this friar's work at the chapter in question. Father Anthony's view did not prevail on this occasion for a chapter was held at Jamestown in Leitrim in September, 1661, under the presidency of Father Malachy Corcoran. 
The Lords Justices took this letter very seriously, for on 21st August, they sent it with Folliott's translation to London to Sir Edward Nicholas, then Secretary of State. In their covering dispatch they remarked that " altho that letter be written in a style purposely intended not to be fully understood by any other than those that are complotting in some work of darkness, yet there are in it several dangerous expressions, viz. , ' to have the gathering or meeting if it be possible before the time,' and ' now I fear it, will be later or slower, and if the black winter comes none shall, come off dead or alive,' and ' fail not for ever to send me the warning in time.' '' They ordered the arrest of O'Callaher, probably Edmund O'Gallagher, and that MacDavid be sent to Dublin for further examination. Their report noted the arrival of several officers of the King of Spain's army and of many priests and friars to disquiet the Irish and urge them to rebellion. That there should have been such arrivals was the most natural thing in the world, seeing that the king, when in exile, had promised that Irish gentry, many of whom were in the Spanish service, should be given back their lands upon his restoration. In addition, he had given an off the record assurance that the Catholic religion was to be tolerated once he should come ; to the throne. What the Lords Justices really had in mind was to play up the danger of a Catholic rising, so that the authorities in England would be the more willing to favour the non-Catholics in the gigantic land scramble then about to take place. Only politicians with an axe to grind would have had the neck to say that the holding of a Franciscan chapter in Ireland in 1661 was likely to endanger the crown. The Lords Justices, however, had both the axe and the neck. Father Anthony had a disregard for accents and aspiration marks, and ideas upon spelling which would not help him were he today a candidate at a civil service examination. The illustration shows portion of the actual text of this interesting document.
