What shall they do nobler than mark their passage, With kindly hearts, mayhap for kindred to follow ? What shall they do wiser than pile a cairn With stones from the wayside, that their tracks and names Be not blown from the hills like sand, and their story be lost forever ? 
In these reflective lines of John Boyle O'Reilly's great Song of the Gael may be found the genesis of the American Irish Historical Society. '' No treason bring we from Erin," the poet proudly cried at the 150th anniversary of the Charitable Irish Society of Boston in 1887 and his words stirred the hearts of men. But it was his counsel against forgetfulness of the Irish part in the upbuilding of the United States that spurred on a young newspaper man, Thomas Hamilton Murray, "to make better known the Irish part in American history.'' Murray had been associated with O'Reilly on The Boston Pilot and then had gone on to editorial posts with the secular press of Boston, Bridgeport, Providence and Lawrence. From his private historical studies of New England libraries and schoolmasters he had found how deep into the nation's beginnings the Irish contribution had gone. He set out, in published articles on Irish pioneer families in New England, to " pile a cairn " that their story should not be lost. It was a hidden story, because historians and genealogists of puritan and pilgrim descent had hewn closely in their researches to exalting their own Anglo-Saxon progenitors and had not wandered far afield. But if the story of the Irish had been neglected, Murray quickly found it was only because there had not yet come one of their race with the zeal to make it known. His first delvings opened mines of shining gold. So rich and great had been the contributions of Ireland to America that he realized he was but tapping the surface soil, that to reach the great lode he must enlist others to work with him. In 1896, in company with James Jeffrey Roche, Joseph Smith, Thomas J. Gargan and Thomas B. Lawler, his project of forming an American Irish historical society was discussed, and a call was sent out, on 26 December, 1896, signed by thirty men of prominence, proud of their Irish heritage, for a meeting at which the project might be launched. The third name on the list is that of Theodore Roosevelt. Third from the last is that of Rear Admiral Richard W. Meade, who became the society's first president-general. There were names that would not ordinarily be considered as denoting Irish blood, but they were those of men in whose families Irish descent long had been treasured. One of the signers was of the eighth American generation, another of the ninth, a third was descended from an Irish settler in Plymouth Colony in 1657. A Methodist minister and an Episcopalian rector signed the call with the presidents of Notre Dame and Catholic universities. Fifty gentlemen met, in answer to the call, at the Revere House in Boston on 20 January 1897, and ratified an agreement organizing " a body to be known as the American Irish Historical Society" whose " special line of work shall be the history of the Irish element in the composition of the American people . . . and the record of the influence of that element in the upbuilding of the nation." Admiral Meade was chosen president of the new society with Mr. Murray as the first Secretary-General; John C. Linehan, Treasurer-General; and Thomas B. Lawler, Librarian. Theodore Roosevelt headed the first executive committee, whose members included Augustus St. Gaudens, Maurice Francis Egan and James Jeffrey Roche. The preamble of the constitution adopted at the meeting, then as now, exemplifies the ideals that the society had held as its proud banner for fifty years. '' Believing that the part taken in the settlement, foundation and upbuilding of the United States by the Irish race has never received proper recognition from historians, and inspired by love for the Republic, a pride in our blood and forefathers, and a desire for historic truth, this society has met and organized." The zeal of Mr. Murray did not stop with the mere formal organization of the society. He heralded its formation in visits from city to city, not only in New England but farther and farther afield. And by letters to men of notable distinction of Irish ancestry he received their eager adherence to the project his enterprise had brought into being. His own researches and writings continued and others of the society joined with him. By the time he and Mr. Lawler had published the first issue of the society's journal the fifty members who had met at the Revere House had been joined by nearly eight hundred more. Mr. Murray's zeal was for a greater America-for the enrichment of her story in the hearts of those of Irish blood by the knowledge of the contribution their kinsmen had made in the building of the United States. His purpose was, in his own words, " to write an unwritten chapter in American history, an essential chapter which has been too long ignored. Yet, until this chapter is written, and its prime importance recognized, American history· as published will be radically defective." His earlier delvings had found the green glory of Ireland in the hills of New England and along her rockbound shores, in family records, in military rosters, in town and church registers. Through the society he was able to reach out to others and with their aid find the same Gaelic threads in the tapestried backgrounds of California and Texas, of the Kentucky of Boone and Lincoln, of Virginia and the Carolinas. Now, fifty years on, when the more signal contributions at least of the Irish are well known and authoritatively recognized, it is difficult to realize the barrenness of public knowledge when the society was organized. Few there are of any racial descent today to whom the names of General John Sullivan, of Commodore John Barry, of the O'Brien brothers of Machias, Maine, are not a proud boast of Ireland's part in the American Revolution. Nor are there any historians who will begrudge these men their rightful honour as American patriots... and as Irishmen. Yet, when the society was started, few of their own kinsmen and a very lonely few among the historians thought much and wrote less to enhance the part these men had played. It was hardly a question of deliberate omission or of wilful neglect. America in the last century was just coming of age and it was with the larger aspects of its earliest history that the scholars were still most engaged. However, there had grown up a feeling among literary amateurs, that had spread to the people at large, that there had been no Irish impress upon the building of the nation until the years after 1840. This was a challenge that the society accepted gladly, the more eagerly because the researches of Mr. Murray and others of the founders proved it was not so. More than that, proofs were available. The official records of the wars that had been fought were available. Old muster rolls and company and battalion rosters going back to the French and the Indian War and on through Lexington to Yorktown and beyond had been zealously kept and could be pored over. Research revealed that there had been many thousands of early soldiers with names beyond all question Irish and individual personalities of note of Irish birth or lineage. The journals of the society are filled with carefully established records of these men and the part they played. Then there were the quiet home folk, who had come from Ireland, lived quiet lives building always and only for the good of their communities and their nation, and then as quietly passing on. It is of the goodly and godly quiet folk that a nation waxes great and strong. It is of their hearts , and minds .. and souls that has come the democratic American way of life. Research revealed that there again, from the earliest times, the dignity of work of thousands of Irishmen and the holiness of the household of thousands of Irish women had played a great and mighty, if silent, part in building the nation. They had been remembered only in birth and death registers, on worn tombstones, in the musty records of land grants and wills probated, in marrying and giving in marriage. But the record of their Irish blood was there, once the search was made. Diligent studies of written testimony in the records of the colonies showed how great had been the neglect that the society was now starting to uncover. That written testimony had been given to the nation in the journals of the society over the years and in separate volumes published in association with the society. From the first, the society has been faithful to the concept that all who came from Ireland, and all of their descendants come within the field it set out to explore. The founders of the society were Catholic and Protestant alike, descendants of the earlier Gaels, the absorbed Danes, the Normans who became " more Irish than the Irish themselves," the Cromwellians and the English and Scottish Planters. Within them all, no matter how many or few the generations that their ancestors had passed in Ireland, beat high a pride of Irish heritage. In many instances, through marriage and intermarriage the ancestral Irish name had been lost. Descendants of the O'Kellys who were in Yarmouth, Massachusetts, in the seventeenth century answered the Revere House call, for example, as a Howe and a Crowell. Theodore Roosevelt derived his Irish blood from the old Dublin family of Bamewall. So it has also been brought to notice that one Patrick Tracy was the early common ancestor, held rightfully in great honour by those of his descendants who knew their genealogical lines, of such presumably pure Anglo-Saxon families among the so-called Boston " Brahmins " as the Lees, the Storrows and the Higginsons. Of Patrick Tracy's blood was the late, revered United States Supreme Court Justice, Oliver Wendell Holmes. From the beginning, Catholic and Protestant members of the society have laboured together in all things to add to the shining roster of those who have contributed to the Irish chapter in American history. The Sullivans, the Moylans and the Carrolls of the American Revolutionary period, a General Sheridan and a General Stonewall Jackson on opposing sides in the war between the states have been their joint possession in the pride of a like Irish heritage. Mr. Murray literally wore himself out in the service of the society and the cause to which he had dedicated himself with a zeal comparable to that of the Four Masters. Like Brother Michael O'Clery he travelled unceasingly, searching for half-forgotten names and deeds of the early Irish in America. The annual society dinner of 1907, to which he had to be carried, unable in his illness to walk, was his last. He was only fifty years old when his own part in the great work he had started was ended. But like Brother Michael, he had drawn to himself, as friends and close associates, a staunch, loyal group of historians and writers who were ready to carry on the high romance of his life work. It was during the ten years' presidency of Joseph I. C. Clarke, brilliant editor and playwright, that the society achieved a physical as well as an intellectual entity. Mr. Clarke, internationally famous wherever Irishmen may gather for his stirring ballad The Fighting Race and its unforgettable refrain of Kelly and Burke and Shea, held office from 1913 to 1923. He was a man of great personal charm with devoted friendships among men of national distinction. 
Among them were such devout adherents of the society's mission as John D. Crimmins, financier and philanthropist, Dr. Thomas Addis Emmet, grandnephew of Robert Emmet, whose memory he revered and to the perpetuation of whose story he devoted his mature life. Another close associate was Dr. John T. Nagle, prominent New York physician. During Mr. Clarke's term of office, the society, which had been incorporated in Rhode Island under Mr. Murray's aegis, had by reason of increasing numbers among its members been gravitating toward New York. For its growing library Mr. Clarke leased an available building in the metropolis. But hardly had he done so than the society became, by testamentary gift of Dr. Nagle, the owner of his New York residence as permanent headquarters. On the grounds of the Nagle estate a detached, fireproof library building was constructed. To this, also as legacies, Dr. Emmet and Mr. Crimmins gave the important collections of books relating to Ireland that it had been their joy to collect during many years. The society occupied the Nagle house for a number of years, expanding its research activities always and in the continuing journals of the organization preserving for posterity the results of its historical investigations. It was during this period there came to the fore another Brother Michael, as assiduous and zealous with the all-consuming fire of the Franciscan whose first name he shares. That was Michael J. O'Brien, who, as the society's historiographer, for more than twenty years made brilliantly noteworthy contributions to the hidden, Irish phase of American history. Mr. O'Brien became nationally and even internationally known for his particular studies of those of George Washington's relatives, intimate friends and military and naval associates who were Irish. An indefatigable delver into old land grants and patents, into church and colonial town records, Mr. O'Brien brought forth lists upon lists of Gaelic names representing thousands of Irish adherents to the early armed forces; schoolmasters and statesmen, pioneers and privateers-a mighty treasure whose importance may never again be ignored by American historians. His extraordinary research ability richly earned for him an honorary degree conferred by the National University of Ireland. As the years passed, the trend of ever-growing New York left the Nagle house an isolated island of culture in a sea of business establishments. The neighbourhood, toward the lower east side, became furtive and shabby. The house was a cherished home, but it was inadequate for the dignity with which the society was born and which succeeding generations had held high. An opportunity came in 1940 to buy the stately Fifth Avenue mansion that William E. Corey had built when he was the millionaire head of the United States Steel Corporation. Its five stories of quiet elegance, of richly panelled rooms and imported marbles, face Central Park and the Metropolitan Museum of Art. It was admirably suited, with minor adaptations, as a permanent home for the society. It had been a condition of Dr. Nagle's will that the society's home, his house or another, should have no mortgage encumbrance. To acquire the regal Corey dwelling on that basis would have been impracticable. But as ever the devotion of the society's members to its cause was absolute. Among them were trustees of the Irish Palace Building Association, an organization formed many years ago to found an Irish cultural center. The funds of the association, wisely invested, had mounted with the years and had been held intact as the original project was abandoned. The 
Palace Association made a gift to the society of the money that made possible both the free and clear acquisition of the mansion at 991 Fifth Avenue and its remodelling for the society's purposes. The Palace Association is presently planning to furnish and equip one of the larger rooms of the mansion as a treasure house of the literature of Irish rebellions and revolutionary movements throughout the centuries. One of the other upper rooms of the building, it might be mentioned, houses the personal library of the late Bourke Cochran, statesman and eloquent orator, a testamentary gift to the society which includes the superb panelling of the room in which the books rested in his New York town house. Other rooms in the building as well have other specialized collections. The main library, however, is on the street level floor, a spacious room with comfortable provision for reference reading in a well-catalogued collection of books on Ireland and the Irish in America that is considered in size and scope second to none in the United States. In display cases are the society's treasures, rare old Irish histories, presentation volumes of historical interest, and manuscripts and holograph documents. Among the latter is the account of his Irish ancestry penned by Commodore Thomas McDonough, one of the most distinguished of American naval heroes. The document bearing the signatures of the Irish Parliamentarians under the leadership of Parnell in 1886 has amusingly and perhaps a little sadly a firm notation by Tim Healy that nothing was written above the signatures as they were set down. Again there is the original petition of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of Cork to Queen Victoria asking the release from Tasmania of William Smith O'Brien, Thomas Francis Meagher, John Mitchel and Terence Bellew McManus. Deeply cherished, too, are a wine glass belonging to Robert Emmet and a prayer book that Daniel O'Connell presented to his daughter, as well as a book, " A Letter from Edmund Burke," that was Wolfe Tone's. The society is rich, also, in documents and newspapers telling the American story of the Land League and of the Fenian Brotherhood. The society's library is the friendliest of meeting places, rather than a chill, austere sanctum sanctorum of pedantry. It is the tone and the mood that J. Frank Cahill, the society's resident executive secretary for the past number of years, insists upon. He, himself, radiates a warm and beaming wish to go to any lengths of helpfulness for the inquiring student or the casual visitor. He makes it smilingly plain that the great grilled portals of the building are to be considered but a friendly half-door swinging wide and that if the society had a gesture of greeting it would be both arms stretched out in Irish welcome. A keen and erudite student of Irish and American Irish history, Mr. Cahill infallibly knows the right books the researcher needs and is happiest when the society's collection provides a volume sought in vain in the great university libraries of the country. It is through his personal helpfulness that the society, in as much as he can of himself do it, is manfully trying to fill the urgent need of an Irish information service in New York, such as most of the other nations now have. An unusual and happy burst of good will towards Ireland has arisen on the part of American magazine and newspaper editors since the end of the war. It is accompanied, however, by a fumbling concept of an Ireland still in the days of Lever and Lover. The society, through its resident secretary, on constant telephonic call for information about present day Ireland, does its part eagerly. However, since it is dedicated to the American Irish scene it may not function as happily as the well-organized public relations services of the other national governments eager for wider American recognition of their manners, customs and business and political advantages. The second floor of the building, which houses the executive secretary's offices, is so arranged that it may be used as a whole as a great open drawing room for literary assemblies and lectures, many of which are held in the course of a year. While it is not possible for all of the members spread throughout the world to take part in these gatherings, The Recorder, a bulletin of the society's activities with short historical notes of interest is sent out with a view to maintaining unanimity of outlook and, as far as is possible, joint association in ideas and purpose. Of recent years, the society has assumed the privilege of awarding a gold medal as a mark of distinction for an outstanding contribution to the United States by a citizen of Irish blood. The earliest holder of a special award was Judge Morgan J. O'Brien, distinguished American Irish jurist, who received honorary membership and an illumined Gaelic scroll. A gold token was adopted when honor was paid Professor Fred Norris Robinson, an American leader in the world's Irish scholarship. It was continued when a like presentation was made to the late Patrick Cardinal Hayes. Among those whom the society has been happy to honour have been Francis Cardinal Spellman, as Archbishop of New York; Supreme Court Justice Frank Murphy, at the time Governor of Michigan and, earlier, Governor General of the Philippines ; James A. Farrell, major American industrialist; the late Dudley Digges, actor of noteworthy distinction ; Dr. James J. Walsh, author of more than fifty books reflecting his both catholic and Catholic learning ; Judge Daniel F. Cohalan, rare among men for his lifelong zeal for both Ireland and America ; and General Hugh Drum, commander of the United States First Army. The award is made at the annual dinner of the society in New York as part of the endeavour to present to general American attention the importance of Ireland's contribution to the life of the republic in all its varied phases. The society's annual dinners have been noteworthy also because of the men of especial distinction in the nation's life who, with pride in their Irish heritage, have been the speakers of the evening. Throughout the half century celebrated last year the written presentation of the Irish part in American history has continued with unabating fervour in the society's journals. The list of writers for the journal has been as long and as imposing as the subjects of which they have treated. Men of distinction in many fields have been eager to put aside more mundane matters to join happily -in relating stories of Irish contributions to the growth of the United States. Among the biographies written have been those definitely proving the Irish ancestry of President Andrew Jackson, Chief Justice Edward White, Governor Thomas Dongan, pre-revolutionary ruler of New York, the Carrolls of Carrollton, General Stonewall Jackson of the Confederate Army, Chief Justice Taney, Mayne Reid, Don Bernardo O'Higgins, Louise Imogen Guiney, Commodore John Barry, father of the American Navy, Robert Fulton, inventor of the steamboat, Generals Michael Corcoran and Philip Sheridan of the Union Army and Mary Ball Washing-on, mother of the first president. In a more general way there have been articles on the Irish among the Minute Men at the Battle of Lexington ; pioneer Irish settlers in every state of the Union ; the Irish part in the founding of Brown 
University; Irish winners of the Congressional Medal of Honour ; the Irish Donation on the founding of Connecticut ; Irish soldiers in the various wars of the country from the earliest days ; the Irish in American journalism ; and passenger lists and birth, death and marriage records from the earliest colonial times. Two men in the present have contributed notably to the dignity and prestige of the society : James McGurrin, Commissioner of Jurors for New York City, has brought to the president-generalship which he has held for several years many of the same qualities that in Joseph I. C. Clarke drew new and enthusiastic friends into the society as more than ordinarily loyal supporters of its mission. The Fifth A venue headquarters is largely a monument to Mr. McGurrin' s leadership of the society. Under his friendly aegis, too, a branch of the society has been actively established in Boston with more than 400 members. 
The other is Joseph C. Walsh, secretary-general, a journalist and man of letters who has devoted his not inconsiderable talents to Ireland's cause since the days of Parnell. Mr. Walsh has given to the editorship of The Recorder the same felicity and charm of literary expression with which he made Ireland, the American organ of the Irish parliamentary party under John Redmond, a superb journalistic achievement. And to the society he has given the same devotion with which in a later period he worked zealously with His Excellency Sean T. Ó Ceallaigh, ambassador of the Irish Republic (and now President of Ireland) to have Ireland's case presented at the Paris peace conference. His love for Ireland, ever above personalities or parties, has made him in his present office one of the strongest individual links between the United States and Ireland. It is not only safe but just and needful to assert that the American Irish Historical Society has done more than any other institution to proclaim the great dignity of Ireland and the nobility of its exiled sons and daughters, a nobility inherent in their being Irish. It has emphasized that the debt of the United States to Ireland is incomparable in its scope and majesty. For fifty years it has reiterated the slogan emblazoned on the flag carried by the Massachusetts Irish Ninth Regiment in the war between the states and proved it was no idle boast : " As Aliens and Strangers Thou Didst Us Befriend: As Sons and True Patriots We Do Thee Defend.'' For a half century it has proclaimed 
unceasingly through the years and the months and the days the truths that John Boyle O'Reilly sang sixty years ago and that quickened the ardour of Thomas Hamilton Murray: 
No treason we bring from Erin-nor bring we shame nor guilt ! The sword we hold may be broken, but we have not dropped the hilt ! The wreath we bear to Columbia is twisted of thorns, not bay s; And the songs we sing are saddened by thoughts of desolate days. But the hearts we bring for freedom are washed in the surge of tears,· And we claim our right by a people's fight outliving a thousand years
