Early in the New Year, just about the time Ireland would be shivering, we decided one sultry Sunday to cool ourselves on Manzanilla Beach which lies across the island of Trinidad from the capital, Port-of-Spain. In the rainy season, from July to November, the floods pouring from the Orinoco's hundred mouths and carrying the red clay of Venezuela hundreds of miles into the Atlantic make Manzanilla unpleasant for bathing. But in the dry season the water is clear and inviting. One can park in the cocoanut groves, dodging the broken beer bottles that mark the progress of U.S. baby-faced recruits down here to learn the mysteries of jungle warfare, watch cars and jeeps race along the twelve-mile beach, or follow the struggles of a group of negroes loading on to a truck an 8oolb. turtle which had come ashore at night to lay its eggs and had been turned on its back by their scouts. We were unlucky that day. We landed square on a beer bottle. It tore the tube in ribbons and left us at the mercy of a sadly gaitered spare. So we picnicked briefly under the palms, abbreviated our frolics in the cool surf to little more than an hour, and started early homewards. Our fears were well founded. With thirty miles still to go, there was a long explosive hiss and the spare was no more. We could of course have got a lift home, but there might not be much of the car left by morning. Not long before the Commissioner of Police had the engine expertly extracted from his car one night outside his own house in Port-of-Spain. And to loiter abroad in this malarial swamp after sundown would be crazy. The anopheles mosquito considerately stays at home in daylight but starts to feed at dusk. Like the nobleman at Fontenoy, I rallied the drooping spirits. "The Irish yet remain," I reminded my companions, " and wherever we are, there's one of them somewhere around." I was of course right. Only two miles down the road I found an Irish home, the owner passing the Sunday afternoon instructing a half dozen negro boys in the manly art of boxing. His wheel didn't fit my car, but he quickly had the tyre and tube off his spare and on to mine. We were on our way with an hour in hand. That could have happened almost anywhere in the Caribbean. Wherever you go, you find Irishmen. The number is nowhere very great, nor is it likely that whites of any nationality will in our time come to constitute the bulk of the inhabitants of any tropical country. But the Irish hold positions of worth and influence, and they are distinguished among the whites by the fact that they mix easily with coloured peoples and generally avoid identifying themselves with the ruling classes. The Scots come nearest to them as mixers. They are hard workers, and, unlike many of the whites, do not look on their stay in the West Indies as a penance tolerable only because they can make money quick and with a cynical disregard for the victims. But the Scots are handicapped in that they are regarded as having the same political and commercial interests as the English, while the Irish have no tradition of exploitation to live down. Their work as missionaries and teachers for over a 
century has given them a reputation for selfless service that stands out in high relief in a society in which even religion is often prostituted for sectional or personal advancement. Irishmen in business and the professions benefit from this reputation, and as a class live up to it, giving value for money and seeking the general advancement with their own. Nor are they embarrassed by the presence of the " shanty " Irish who give a bad name to their countrymen in many cities of Britain and the United States. Of the first Irish settlers in the Caribbean, the unfortunate men, women and children transplanted there as slaves by Cromwell in the seventeenth century and by his successors during the Jacobite wars, I have been able to learn little. Poor whites, locally called "red legs," share the poverty of the negroes around them in a district called Little Scotland on the north-west coast of Barbados. I am satisfied none of them speak Irish, as is sometimes stated in Ireland, and they have no traditions or folk history to explain their origins. They have completely lost the Faith for which their Irish, Scottish or English ancestors suffered. Their accent, like that of all Barbadians, white and negro, is extraordinarily similar to that of Ireland and distinct from the accents of the neighbouring islands. Many of the Irish shipped to Barbados were transplanted to Jamaica when Cromwell with typical treachery seized that island from Spain without declaration of war in May, 1655. Their owners must have been pleased with them, for they immediately urged Cromwell to send as many more as he could round up. Cromwell in turn wrote to his son, Henry, who was in command in Ireland. He thought the idea a capital one and suggested the consignment should include 1,500 to 2,000 boys between the ages of twelve and fourteen. "We could well spare them," he wrote, "and they would be of use to you ; and who knowes but that it may be a meanes to make them Englishmen, I meane rather, Christianes.'' No time was wasted. An Order in Council of October, 1655, directed that a thousand boys and a thousand girls, all under fourteen should be shipped from Galway in December. No contemporary account survives of the shipment or the arrival, but Dr. Browne, writing about Jamaica in 1756, says that Cromwell transported there a thousand men and a thousand women from Ireland. Later writers repeat his statement. The subsequent history of the Irish slaves in Jamaica is unchronicled. Recently, however, one of the Irish-American Jesuits from the Boston Province, whose educational and social work in the predominantly Protestant island of Jamaica is in the best Irish missionary traditions, listed among the pupils then at school in Kingston the distinctively Irish names of Collins, Kennedy, McCormick, O'Hare, Burke, Mackey, McDermott, McKeon and Walsh. , The pupils were apparently full-blooded negroes but the physiognomy and facial characteristics were typically Irish: All of the names listed are common among Jamaican negroes, with Burke occurring most frequently. African slaves generally acquired the name of their master. But the Irish names cannot be explained in that way. The records list at regular intervals from 1655 the names of the planters. Burke does not appear in any of the early lists, and most of the other names are absent. The most reasonable theory is that these "Black Irish" are in fact descendants of Cromwellian slaves. A more recent effort was made to settle Irishmen as labourers in Jamaica. After the abolition of slavery in the 
Evening in Grenada, B.W.I. 
A school-chapel in Trinidad's northern mountain range 
Tairico Bay, Trinidad 
Carnival Revellers, Port-of-Spain 
l830's, the sugar industry was threatened with extinction because the ex-slaves would not work in the cane fields on the terms offered. The British Government offered a bounty for the importation of white immigrants. O'Connell denounced the scheme as white slavery and it fell through. One ship arrived in Limerick where the police guarded it night and day. It sailed with only 127 emigrants on board, a third of the proposed complement. The British had to import coolies as indentured labourers from India, introducing yet another strain to the meeting-place of the races, and creating a political problem that with the independence of India promises serious complications. About the same time the Irish were reaching out to the Caribbean in a new role. Catholic Emancipation made missionary work possible in British colonies. The emancipation of the slaves allowed the negroes for the first time to educate their children-if they could find schools. Colonial governments showed no interest in this problem. They hadn't the money, and anyhow what was the point in educating negroes? The Catholic Church knew the answer to that one. In 1836 the Sisters of St. Joseph of Cluny opened St. Joseph's Convent in Port-of-Spain, a foundation that is today the mother house of a province with eight convents in Trinidad and convents in Tobago, Grenada, St. Lucia and St. Vincent. While there had been a fair number of local vocations, the province must still rely on Ireland for the bulk of its members. About fifty of the eighty-four sisters are Irish. St. Joseph's Convent, destroyed in 1944 with the loss of the lives of three Irish nuns in a fire that many believe was malicious, has risen from the ashes through the superhuman efforts of two great Irishwomen. It is the biggest secondary school for girls in Trinidad. 
In 1863 the Holy Ghost Fathers took over the first secondary school for boys in Trinidad. It had been started some years earlier by the Archbishop but had been suspended for lack of funds and staff. With over l,300 pupils it is the biggest secondary school in the whole Caribbean. Though it gets less from public funds annually than the only government secondary school in the colony with a third the number of pupils, it is steadily increasing its lead in academic records and threatens to monopolise the three university scholarships granted each year by the government. In extra-curricular character-forming activities, far more important than the imparting of knowledge to a people weak in cultural traditions and the arts of civilised life, the difference is still greater. St. Mary's and the other Catholic schools are developing drama, music, youth movements and other activities in a way that gives promise of leaders to a hitherto leaderless society. The pioneers were right in their belief that the Caribbean peoples would take advantage of the schools if they were built. Negroes, mulattos, Asiatic Indians, Chinese, all are clamouring for more and better education. They are conscious of their social and economic inferiority and feel that the school path is the road to equality with the ruling classes. No doubt they are substantially right in their diagnosis. Given the right education, the rest is bound to follow. The Irish seem destined to play the main part in supplying this demand. The non-Catholic sects seem to be losing the evangelistic urge they showed even twenty-five or thirty years ago. The progressive paganisation of the great Protestant lands is not only eliminating sources of revenue but destroying the sense of vocation and altruistic service which many of the non-Catholic missionaries undoubtedly possessed. Their clergy tend to regard themselves as higher civil servants entitled to be paid and treated on the same level. Most of them are married, and to keep a wife and family in a remote mission is very costly and makes severe demands on a person's time and energies. In consequence they have neither the money nor the determination to maintain their present schools, not to speak of extending to meet the demands of a rapidly increasing population. Nor will the colonial governments step boldly into the breach in either the primary or secondary sphere. For years they have been trying to get dictatorial control of all existing schools in order to introduce their concept of -naturalistic morality divorced from supernatural religion. They want to indoctrinate the rising generation and convert the people into willing slaves. But they are unwilling to pay the price. Perhaps doubting their ability to control if they introduced adequate educational facilities, they will not increase the present proportion of ordinary revenues devoted to education, five to eight per cent. as compared with 25 to 30 per cent. in countries like Canada or Ireland where the need is much less. Even the few secondary schools maintained by colonial governments are deteriorating for lack of staff. These are the circumstances in which Ireland becomes the main hope for Caribbean education. An Irishman is at the head of the Archdiocese of Port-of-Spain, which embraces Trinidad, Tobago, Grenada, St. Vincent, St. Lucia, St. Kitts and other smaller islands. His suffragans rule over British Guiana, -Barbados and Dominica. And though Jamaica is jurisdictionally distinct, it also looks to him for leadership. Above and beyond all else, the Most Rev. Dr. Finbar Ryan, O.P., will go down in the 
history of the West Indies for his single-minded devotion to Catholic education. Opposed and thwarted in every possible way by officialdom, he has pushed education with unflagging energy. His thirty Irish fellow-Dominicans and the other priests engaged in parochial work in Trinidad have all been pressed into the task. They manage to build three or four or five new primary schools every year, while the government's average for ten years has been one a year. Many of these are fine buildings costing £5,000 to £10,000. Others are what can be improvised where there is a will but no cash. Some time ago I was present at the opening of one of the latter. It was in a jungle clearing ten miles from a school and eight from a road. A young Irish Dominican had persuaded the parents to make the clearing, saw up the tree trunks to make floor, walls and desks, and thatch the hut with palm leaves. The cash outlay was ten shillings. Three years ago the Holy Ghost Fathers opened a second fine college in Port-of-Spain to ease the pressure on St. Mary's. Our Lady of Fatima College has already more than 300 pupils but the pressure is not eased. The two colleges have a combined waiting list of 500. Twelve of the eighteen Holy Ghost Fathers are Irish. They are helped by about a dozen Holy Ghost students, most of whom also are Irish. The Archbishop returned to Ireland a year or two ago in search of further helpers. He was successful. The Presentation Brothers within a few months started a secondary school in St. George's, Grenada, and took over an established secondary school in St. Lucia. The English Dominican Fathers vacated their presbytery in St. George's to serve as a temporary school. The accommodation was overcrowded the first day and expansion beyond the present number of 70 pupils must await the completion of a college which the Brothers are preparing to build. Three more Brothers from Ireland have opened another college at San Fernando, second city of Trinidad. In addition to the Brothers, His Grace enlisted the help of another Irish congregation of nuns. Six Holy Faith Sisters from Glasnevin have started a school in Port-of-Spain, easing the strain on the over-tasked Sisters of St. Joseph of Cluny. To supply a sufficiency of adequately qualified teachers is a great problem. As I already indicated, the non-Catholic colleges are deteriorating because they cannot pay rates to attract and hold the best. The expenses of travel and living have reached extreme heights and are not yet stabilised. It will cost an Irishman far more to maintain a given standard of living in these parts than in Dublin. The Catholic colleges flourish only because the priests, nuns and brothers are able and willing for God's sake to live modestly, to deny themselves comforts that most regard as essentials, to return for rest and reinvigoration to a temperate climate only once in five to ten years as compared with the once in three years now normal for Europeans in the civil service, business and commerce. A recent experiment in Irish missionary activity in Africa has been the recruiting of young doctors to serve a few years in the mission hospitals before they settle down in whatever branch of their profession they intend to undertake. Such is the need for qualified secondary teachers in the Caribbean that I imagine a similar scheme to increase the staffs of the Catholic colleges would enable them to expand very substantially. Conditions could hardly be made sufficiently attractive to appeal to the mercenary, but there is enough of the Irish missionary spirit alive in many young boys and girls fresh from the 
universities to make them ready, to wander for Christ and continue the traditions of our race. Catholics are also giving a lead in the co-operative movement, and here again the Irish are in the forefront. The officials and the politicians were inclined to throw cold water on this movement at the start. They said the coloured peoples were too ignorant and too divided among themselves to co-operate. The Rev. J. P. Sullivan, S.J., in Jamaica and the Rev. P. J. Long, O.P., in Trinidad, didn't believe that. They started study circles to get people to understand the Antigonish methods of co-operation, then persuaded the people to form credit unions in order to build up capital. Now they have reached the advanced stage with the formation of both producer and consumer co-operatives. Jamaica has a substantial lead, particularly in co-operative marketing but Trinidad is catching up. A cooperative bakery was opened in a Port-of-Spain suburb in May, 1946. The movement is spreading to the other islands and is now attracting the attention of colonial governments who do not like to see anything develop that is not under their control. The Rev. A. M. Bowring, O.P., is spreading the Antigonish ideas in Grenada. Born in the south Pacific of English-born parents, Father Bowring visited Ireland several times in his youth. He is convinced that economic normality cannot be achieved in the West Indies until absentee landlordism is replaced by peasant proprietorship as it was in Ireland. He devotes much of an excellent weekly newspaper he edits to propagating this thesis and to urging the people to work towards economic independence by cooperative buying and selling. Father Bowring is not the only one who thinks the West Indies have more to learn from small mainly agricultural 
Domhnall Óg Mac Eoin 
countries like Ireland than from the big highly industrialised countries on which their eyes have been fixed to seize what crumbs might fall from rich tables. Many students come to Irish universities, and many more would come if they could gain admission. They admire the spirit of self-reliance of our people and say to themselves that one gets on better in the world for not being too subservient and always looking to others. Irishmen in different walks of life illustrate in practice the same outlook. They are to be found in all kinds of activities. The Fogarty, O'Dowd and Egan families own departmental stores, hotels and race horses in Barbados, Trinidad and British Guiana. In the creation of modern newspapers the names of O'Loughlin and McGowan stand out. The Fitzgerald brothers made their mark in banking. Doctors include Gillespie, O'Donohue, Clearkin and Moynihan ; and judges, Blackhall, Hallinan and Irwin. The members of the religious bodies are held together by their own organisations, but the rest of the Irish in the Caribbean have no centre around which to group. In this they are at a disadvantage compared with other national groups, all of which have consuls, trade representatives or honorary consuls in the principal centres. The benefits are 
substantial because trade is conducted in terms of personal relations rather than on the merits of goods or the keenness of prices. A two-way trade already exists. Before the war substantial quantities of Irish potatoes and butter used to reach the West Indies. And Irish horses were famous among a people whose main sport is horse racing. The trade in horses has been renewed. The biggest breeder in the Eastern Caribbean attended the 1947 Horse Show and made several purchases. On the other side, we are taking tinned grapefruit juice, jam, marmalade and rum. As for the future, it would seem that not only in education but in many spheres the proportion of Irish among the whites is likely to increase. Britain is no longer able to spare the skilled men for technical and administrative posts. The policy of nationalisation at home has already caused an acute shortage of higher civil servants and is reflected in a deterioration in the quality of colonial administrators. And as the native peoples develop political consciousness and power and have a greater say in appointments, they are likely to welcome Irish technicians free from colour prejudice and from commercial or political interests that might bias their judgment.
