To my surprise, I find myself out of harmony with Joe O'Connor's views on the teaching of Irish almost throughout. " I was condemned," he writes-having been presented at the opening of a school-term with Latin, Greek and Irish grammars-'' to learn Irish in the mediaeval mode, which was devised at the Renaissance, for the revival of Latin and Greek, two dead languages; rather, two scriptures which survive only on paper. .... What hope had I of learning Irish with the unconscious ease of a native speaker ? " The implication here-by an experienced teacher-is that grammar, as taught in the schools, is lumber, and that literature must be little better. The fact is that we cannot have literature without grammar unless the jargon of the boxing ring be regarded as literature. "I was forcibly fed on MacGhniomhartha Fhinn in the Junior Grade, '' he goes on; "on Oidhe Chlainne Tuireann in the Middle Grade, and ... Cath Rois na Riogh in the Senior. At the end, I could read and digest any text of the Ossianic Society. . . . . But I could not talk Irish. . . . . The gravest error the Gaelic League has ever committed was its neglect of its obligation to prepare and issue . . . a set of suggestions on the best way of adapting Grandma Moran's fireside method of teaching Irish to the exigencies of crowded League rooms." It is not so easy to apportion the blame for the Celtic texts first prescribed for the Intermediate; because, with the exception of the elementary books published by the Society for the Preservation of the Irish Language, followed by Father O'Growney's " Simple Lessons," there were-as a result of the Penal Laws -few Irish texts available. Publishers had no incentive to provide them; hence, texts suitable for the secondary schools did not become available until Father John MacErlean presented us with Keating's Poems, to be followed by Father Dinneen's editions of the Kerry and Cork poets, all edited-even though in the mediaeval mode-with the thoroughness characteristic of their Order. Oidhe Chlainne Tuireann, Cath Rois na Riogh and their kind would not seem so forbidding to students from areas in which they, or tales like them, were recited night after night, as in my native Valentia, where storytellers like Seán Phartoláin and Paddy an Bhánaigh had their homes crowded on winter nights with neighbours panting for Ossianic and kindred lore. Neither is the Gaelic League so blameworthy as here suggested. The Central Branch from the beginning had Irish classes for all grades, and the reading of texts was loud enough to afford a good training for the ear, and so help to produce fluent speakers. Debates followed the lectures-among those often participating being Michael Cusack, the most ravishing Irish speaker I have ever heard. The Oireachtas and the Feis too had competitions in oratory, recitation, singing, story-telling, debating. At the Árd-Fheis, in time, we grew tired of long speeches in English-some in '' the Oxford manner" ; and we decided that thenceforward all discussion be exclusively in Irish, a resolution still observed without the slightest difficulty. One of the first delegates to propose a motion at the ensuing Árd-fheis was Father Charlie Brennan of Killarney, and loud applause followed his eloquent speech, for he was thought, the previous year, to have little or no Irish. Thus, even Craobh na nÁirne was not so ineffective as Joc in his modesty would suggest. Coming more specifically to the primary schools, he gives his imprimatur to this unconvincing opinion of the late Henry Morris : '' Regarding the character of the Irish teaching, its leading faults are too much reading, too much memorising, and too little conversation." But what better approach to fluent and improving conversation than the audible reading of excellent idiomatic Irish, which it would be the duty of a Board of Education to provide? What more fruitful exercise than the memorising and reading aloud-so as to train eye and ear-of all the proverbs in the Irish language, supplemented with a series of equally pregnant quatrains from our choicest poetry-religious and Ossianic ? These would so fortify the mind of the student that his Irish could never be corrupted, if only the Training Colleges so equipped their students as is their manifest duty. But Joe fondly concludes that " we may take the case against reading and writing as proven." Fóirior cráidhte.
Resuscitative measures and nothing else will serve our purpose,'' he declares,. ''and these are the measures practised in the nurseries of the world since time began." The nurseries, indeed, are excellent, not to say essential, but not adequate. Take the nurseries of rustic England : where would the English language with its, weird dialects be if it had to lean on the nursery of the English peasant and the home of the yokel ? Without a printed literature, on the other hand, our oppressed and destitute Gaelic people-almost every one of them-preserved an idiomatic phrase-vocabulary which would do credit to a judge or to a prince of the Church. The Irish language, therefore, is not to be blamed if the late John Marcus O'Sullivan "could not bless. himself in Irish to save his soul " : in great part, the credit for that may be divided between St. Brendan's and Clongowes. For, it surely would be illogical to think that a man who seems to have made himself thoroughly familiar with German-for I well remember Haldane's public tribute to him-would be so foreign to his antecedents as not to be able to acquire Irish. 'Twere better his name had been left at rest. Amongst other things, Joe animadverts on the fact that "when the demand for Irish ' arithmetic' arose suddenly, each of the ·publishers commissioned its own translator to prepare a series ..... Each of those writers . . . invented -terms as he hurriedly translated the publisher's English arithmetic into Irish. . . . It is not surprising that the results were startlingly incongruous . . . . I . . . seldom found two schools in agreement even in the names of the . ordinal numbers. . . . I discovered individual schools . . . in which the colloquial numeration was used in the lower standards and discarded in the higher . . . . Juniors who knew 80 as ceithre fichidh had to learn to call it ochtmhogha.”_ And so on. Does the author blind himself to the common tendency, as school-folk grow up, to use a dozen for 12, a score for 20, four score for 80, five-and-twenty for 25 ; to count 120 as 100, 126 and 128 for the long hundred, in counting fish, eggs and the like, unless times have changed ! My great objection to ochtmhogha and its kind is that they are mainly used to force Irish into the English mould as those abominable advertisements-almost from every department of government-are literal translations of stereotyped English. Why does sheer shame-if nothing else-not put an end to this, and to such atrocities as Aer-lingus and Na túirling go stada an bus ? The serious comparison of the school " juniors who can speak Irish reasonably well" with the Mass-servers who phonetically memorise the responses necessary for their purpose is entirely beyond my comprehension, and strikes me as grotesque. How much familiar fireside English do we find in the nomenclature used in arithmetic, algebra, euclid, mathematics generally; in grammar and other vital subjects ? Take a few examples : subtraction, multiplication quotient, decimal fractions, compound interest, plus, minus, x=3y-2z, equations, parallelogram, hypotenuse, obtuse angle, isosceles triangle, semicircle, circumference. In what rural or other home are these words heard, where such grammatical terms as indefinite article, collective noun, participial adjective, demonstrative pronoun, irregular verb, and what not ? Who, even among adults, can give simple definitions of preposition, conjunction, interjection ; of notes of exclamation and interrogation ? Joe has no objection to teaching these freaks through English. How did our evangelists qualify themselves to carry the light of faith into the dark places of Europe before English was any better than a patois; how did we teach the students who then came here from Italy, France, England ? How do our ecclesiastical students, whose minds are not growing more photographic, assimilate lectures delivered in French, Italian, Spanish, in the Irish Colleges of Paris, Rome, Salamanca? How do the Norse, Dutch, Flemish, Czechs, conduct their education without the use of English ? "'That kind of education can be hoped for in India, Egypt, South Africa, as they discard English ? What will be the attitude of Germany towards Mrs. Roosevelt's sleek suggestion that its oppressed people practise English in the occupied western zones? '' The deóntas to Irish-speaking households," he proceeds, in switching to the home, '' was a good idea in itself and gave good promise at first." To those Irish-speaking people of the glens, " Irish is as ordinary as their working-c1othes-a threadbare thing which cost them nothing . . . and is ready for the discard. . . . Where would Mac Ui-and Seán Ó-... be but for English ? . . . Below there in the bog footing turf. And yourself, too! Would you be coming here in your fine car . . . if you had no English ? . . . Yes, I can speak Irish, and would like my children to have it-but my wife can't. Would you wish me to come between the mother and her children on her own hearthstone ? '' All this and more with manifest approval. As well suggest that our starving people a century ago might accept the soup and abandon the Faith as that our generation would ambition luxury and, for pelf, abandon the tongue which was the vehicle of the Faith through the long generations of our Penal Purgatory and is still its adequate vehicle in the unspoilt areas. Personally, I have loathed the Deóntas, and would never have favoured it. And I never knew anyone in Iveragh to regard Irish as ready for the discard ; never knew anyone to make a less complimentary comment on it than that, at worst, it was no load. Anyway, do any other people in the world shape their education system to fit their children for England or America and leave the ·economic remedy untried ? Joe misleads himself into the notion that certain persons-myself included-learned Irish at our mother's knee. My mother, God rest her, knew no Irish at her marriage, in 1870; after a dozen years she was quite fluent in it when, in the early 'eighties, Free Emigration swept the entire labouring population of our area to America. The old scéalta fianaidheachta gradually faded out. My father learned to read Irish from the manuscripts which were a family heirloom until lent to hedge-schoolmasters who never restored them. When Irish from the pen of Father O'Leary appeared in the Cork Weekly Examiner and from Dr. Hyde in the Weekly Freeman, he got both papers regularly, and, at the week-ends, read aloud for visiting neighbours both the Land League news and the Irish columns, so that our ears got a good training and we gradually came to understand Irish well. At that stage, Joyce's Irish grammar happened to be one of the book-prizes I won in some competition, and forthwith I devoured it. I first left home at eighteen and, after a few years, returned from an atmosphere not Irish-speaking. When I settled in Dublin at twenty-five, and was urged to speak at the Celtic Literary Society and the Gaelic League, it was not for weeks that I could definitely identify the unfamiliar sound of my own Irish voice. When the Christian Brothers' Irish Grammar came, I mastered it in about a dozen sittings. Then I began to compete at the Dublin Feis, even the Oireachtas. Soon, Father Dinneen linked me up in the compilation of the Irish dictionary, and for three years-in the Royal Irish Academy and Trinity College library devoted three hours a day to it as a labour of love, finishing with a comprehensive knowledge of the language - every word in it in almost every setting - but still not speaking over-fluently. Other enthusiasts worked less steadily in Dublin, London, otherwhere. There was no picture house, thank God, no radio. Meanwhile came the Keating Branch. There, in time, I had a B.A. class, an M.A. class with only two students, a medical students' class organised by Dr. Denis Coffey, then head of the Cecilia-Street School of Medicine and on the Keating Branch Committee. Tadhg O'Donoghue had more technical classes. Everyone did his best, and we were all at pains to expand our working vocabulary. I soon found myself drawn deeply into writing, editing, association with a princely publishing house, travel -throughout Ireland, Britain, Europe, around the world-observation, study, prompted largely by the competitions and the spirit of the Oireachtas which, in twenty years, did more for our traditional culture and the Irish language than the University has done in forty. Incidentally, I have spoken, publicly, in half the great cities of the world---invariably opening in Irish-to find our exiles everywhere professing their delight at hearing their mother tongue-preeminently the language of prayer, many of them fondly said. I, therefore, reject as an isolated example of the slave mind, and not generally applicable, the story of the Dingle girl whose neighbour was put to shame because a few West-British clerks in a local shop laughed at him for his ignorance of English. "Mo mhallacht uithe mar Gaoluinn! " said the old man turning away. Fóirior cráidhte arís. Joe's other case of Mrs. A. and Mrs. B. puts in a nutshell what I am afraid is going on without cessation in the National University. But, where was the school inspector while Mrs. B. imbued the children, so perfectly trained by Mrs. A., with " a positive dislike for Irish and all that it stands for ?" What are the appropriate functions of an inspector? Outside the Irish classes, what subjects, in University College or in Trinity College, Dublin, are taught through the medium of Irish? What kind of excuse is it that there are no available text-books in Irish forty years after the first Chancellor of the National University hoped it would soon become a brilliant centre of Irish studies? Why is anybody now appointed to a professorship in the university, who is incapable of putting his text-books into Irish-unless perhaps a couple of imported Modern Language lecturers ? Until they become capable, why not get competent scholars like Tadhg Ua Donnchadha to put the necessary books into Irish? I 
presided, I think, at the first Irish debate in An Cumann Gaedhealach at University College, Dublin, some forty years ago ;. I presided at the latest Irish debate there also, as I have periodically done in the interval. The attendance at the first was many times that at the last, but the enthusiasm showed no decline. Why don't the university authorities make An Cumann Gaedhealach with its ardent students from all areas, the joyous Gaedhealtacht of Dublin, and ultimately of Ireland? Is the Celtic Faculty there a misnomer ? Has it any real utility ? I am sorry I have not got space to deal with the Education Commissions which it was my privilege to initiate in 1919. At that juncture, I found time to fill concurrently, as labours of love, the three important offices of Chairman of Dail Eireann, President of the Gaelic League and Minister of the National Language, which later expanded into the Ministry of Education. Thanks to the example of the Gaelic League, the inaugural meeting of Dail Eireann was efficiently conducted in Irish ; the surprising degree to which Irish was used by the First Dail may be seen from the official reports. The same Gaelic League in its heyday I was able to use as a temporary Council of Education, gradually diffusing its spirit through the whole system without interfering much in its routine during the transition -for at that juncture Irish education in all its grades had prominent representatives in every department of the League's work. Thus we laboured in an edifying Christian spirit for three years. Had the split of 1922 not taken place, our Ministry would have found means to give the national language its natural place in our educational system, in Dail Eireann, in our entire national life ; and the uniform standard of orthography we had all but reached would be established and perpetuated. The split was followed by party preferences, into which efficiency did not enter. Men of no culture reached overnight the rank of Gaelic writers, authors, editors, and a miniature Babel has resulted. Our scheme for the production of standard technical books of all kinds in I ish was debased to the function of subsidising slip-shod translations of fifth-rate English tales, so that the demand for Irish books in the public libraries has since declined by seventy-five per cent. Irish vanished rapidly from Dail and Senate; and now the few at Leinster House who utter a few words of Irish there occasionally only give emphasis to their own isolation. We got, it is true, a castle in the air, entitled the Institute for Advanced Studies-with an unsought adjunct to it quite recently-as well as some unnamed group to mutilate the traditional orthography which we should regard as a sacred heritage, an edifice of the intellect into which had been put the thought and judgment and progressive skill of our sages and evangelists for twelve hundred years. An iconoclast with a hammer can mutilate in a month the masterpieces of sculptors of genius over a whole century-for sickening evidence of which we do not need to go beyond Malmesbury and Avignon. On the twin subjects of script and spelling, Joe is more vehement than enlightening. "We all remember the acrimonious clamour which killed the proposal to modernise the Irish script," he writes: "The intransigents won on a foul ... It was vain to exhibit photostat copies of old Saxon poems and gospels written in the pseudo-Gaelic script before Brian Boru made history. The vociferous many swamped the pacific few, and frightened the vote-conscious authorities from proceeding with an overdue change for the better. . . . . But they gave no directions to the publishers of school-books on the important matter of Gaelic type ... and the publishers made no attempt to improve the graceless fonts. . . . I shall bypass the . . . . current high feeling against the measures being taken to simplify the spelling of Irish. But I shall show as I pass them by where my sympathies lie." And he has indeed shown volubly where his sympathies lie without giving the slightest indication that, a century ago, the classic type designed by M. H. Gill and George Petrie for the Annals of the Four Masters drew compliments from all parts of the world. Irish type and Irish script are as legible and graceful as those of any other language, and so flexible that they may be modified into any form the faddists might desire. Quite recently-just a century after the publication of the Annals of the Four Masters- Comhdhaltas Uladh has published through the same printing firm an Irish missal in the traditional Ulster spelling and in Irish type, which for grace and legibility may challenge comparison with popular missals in any other language. When or where, may I ask, was " the acrimonious clamour '' heard ? Who were "the intransigents that won on. a foul?" Who exhibited the photostat copies of old Saxon poems and gospels ? I profess no familiarity with old Saxon poems or gospels-in pseudo-Gaelic script before Brian Boru-or with old Saxon texts of that era. But I have misread history if Colm Cille and his evangelists-400 years before Brian Boru -did not go to Iona, with their Gaelic script-because of it indeed ! because of the treasured copy Colm Cille had made of Finian's Codex-'' to preach the word of God to the men of Alba, the Britons and the Saxons " ; if, in time, they did not preach among the Highland Picts ; if, in fact, they did not christianise all the Islands, even Iceland itself. After the death of Colm Cille, Aidan of Iona, educated at Iniscattery, was chosen to convert the people of Northumbria from Lindisfarne, "the Iona of the Anglo-Saxons," where, writes Mrs. Green, "the English were taught writing and the letters used by them till the Norman conquest." Pseudo-Celtic script, indeed ! Under the patronage of Aidan arose a house at Melrose, while, under his inspiration and that of Caedmon, father of English sacred poetry, convents for men and women arose at Hartlepool and Whitby, where they flourished until the ambition and envy of Wilfrid gave them their first set-back. Nor was this all. ·Bede tells us that " Fursa, coming into the province of the East Saxons, was honourably received by the king, and . . . . converted many unbelievers to Christ." When halting at Burghcastle, he was accompanied by a host of Irish evangelists. Having laboured there and built " a noble monastery,'' they proceeded to France, where Fursa won fame at Peronne, and his two brothers in Flanders. Other Irish evangelists laboured in middle and western England ; yet others in Winchester, Basham, Malmesbury, Glastonbury of the Gael where they wrote and illustrated books, and all over Cornwall-in a word, from John o' Groats to the Land's End. I have no space for the hosts who preceded and followed Fursa, to labour all over Belgium, France, Italy, Switzerland, Germany. It will suffice to mention Virgilius the Astronomer, of Salzburg, who incurred the envy of Boniface, apostle of Saxony, which was christianised by ' missionaries from Clonmacnoise, as Wilfrid was envious of the Irish teachers who overflowed from Iona and Lindisfarne. This cross-channel envy is an old story. - One wonders whether Joe O'Connor will still contend that it was the belated shreds of " pseudo-Gaelic 
script " of the old Saxon poems that inspired waves of Irish evangelists to leave their priceless manuscripts in the most venerable libraries of Europe to win reverence for our race and speech from German scholars and inspire the grammar of Zeuss, as other Irish evangelists were identified with the development of ecclesiastical architecture from Ratisbon to Cologne. I don't know that I can appropriately occupy your space with a refutation of the hollow gairm catha : '' We are not dead ! The language is not the people, nor have the people followed the language into oblivion. . ... We, the people, ... shall always remain, strong, distinctive, and indestructibly Irish, while there is an O'Keeffe in Duhallow ... Who dare say that . . . Mitchel, Meagher and Doheny ... or Tone, Emmet and Russell, were less Irish at heart than Ruaidhri O Conchubhair and Diarmuid MacMurchadha, who spoke the purest of Irish and failed their people ? . . . We are neither dead nor lying down. Our tongues are changed, but not our hearts." So we may abandon the language of Brigid and Ita and Dympna; of Brendan, Sedulius, Columbanus ; of Donnchadh Mór O Dalaigh and Tadhg Dall O hUiginn; of Geoffrey Keating and Padraigin Hackett, of Florence Conry and Michael O'Clery, and adopt that of Elizabeth and Anne, of Cromwell and the Georges. We may discard the language of O'Neill who would not deform his lips with the vulgar Béarla, of Rory O'Moore who implored the Irish monks to bring their Irish type from Belgium before it was too late, of Eugene O'Curry and of O'Donovan Rossa who strove for its perpetuation to the last; and we may' go with gusto to the demoralising pictures and the imperialising Rugger match-as if the Saxons, old or young, would ever patronise a hurling match-lay our hands on our ultra-Irish hearts, and shout : 
Ar aghaidh leis an mBéarla, an Iasacht abú:
We're Irish by nature as brave Cathal Brugha. 
As to '' the current feeling against the measures being taken to simplify the spelling of Irish,'' my views on the subject have appeared over my name in the public press, and I don't know whether they have won me a place among " the diehard enthusiasts who resent criticism, and dread the result of any unbiassed probing into the facts." The spelling problem has pretty well reduced itself to (a) the fate of idhe whether used medially, as the nominative plural, or otherwise; (b) the proposed substitution of ú for ughadh ; (c) the wanton interference with other structural combinations of letters, which only proclaims the official reformers' invincible ignorance of the development of Irish orthography and their utter indifference to it. With the first proposal (a) I do not intend to waste your space. The only objection urged against ughadh is the silly one that though having four letters-two vowels and two consonants-it is now monosyllabic, whereas we are never reminded that ughadh is the equivalent of the termination ' ianization,' the closing four letters of which,-tion, with its two vowels and two consonants, is monosyllabic also. Briefly, this -ughadh in, say, neart-ughadh is formed by first adding uigh to neart to get the imperative form of the resultant verb neartuigh; then adding -adh for the verbal noun neartughadh, the i meanwhile being dropped under the caol le caol rule, as happens also in, say, buail, bualadh, and hundreds of kindred verbs. At their very worst, are not, say, críostuide, críostuigh, críostuidheacht, críostughadh far more economic orthographically than their English equivalents christian, christianise, christianity, christianization ? Then who will openly urge the amputation of " the dead letters'' in face of these simple facts? As one example of (c), it will suffice to say that the official reformers would substitute naofa for naomhta at the instigation of some zealots with manifestly defective hearing. This is sheer vandalism. Naomhtha is a participial adjective derived from naomh, a saint, a word widely used to represent the ecclesiastical head of the tribe before our diocesan boundaries were clearly defined. It has come to have a more sacred function, because the genitive singular of the noun is used, with the force of an adjective, when we are making the sign of the cross : I n-ainm an Athar agus an Mhic agus as Spioraid Naoimh. That it is here definitely treated as a noun seems more manifest when we observe its use, without alteration, after a feminine noun as in Tobar na Croiche Naoimh-not na Croiche Naoimhe-Holycross Well. of which there is one in Caherciveen, and in the neighbourhood muinntir na Faille Móire. Naomhtha and beannuighthe are used almost alternatively in tobar naomhtha and tobar beannuighthe, holy well, blessed well. If the vandals had their way, and were permitted to use naofa, where would the sacred import of naomhtha and hundreds of similar words go? I cannot pursue the matter here; Those eager to know my considered views-if you will kindly permit me to mention it, Rev. Editor-will find them in my pamphlet, "Spelling Made Easy." While public money has been squandered on the outrageous Litriu Simpli, my pamphlet, which cost me a substantial sum to publish, has been subjected to an official boycott ; and a complaint I more recently submitted, and substantiated - that the so-called Irish version of the Constitution is repugnant to the provisions of the Constitution itself in so far as they purport to protect the citizens' rights-has not elicited even the courtesy of a formal acknowledgment. Who then has evinced the dread to face the facts ? I suggest that Joe O'Connor get the representative of Fossa to ask at Leinster House (a) how much public money this unwarranted experimenting with Irish spelling and type has cost to date ; (b) how much public money has been expended on the phrase dictionary to which the late Seán Ua Caomhánaigh devoted so many years of his life ; (c) what is its present position, and what are the prospects of its publication ? To conclude : Joe in a gesture not intended as " a foul,'' reminds us that two of the few unworthy men early Ireland produced, '' spoke the purest Irish and failed the people." He, doubtless, forgot to add that Luttrell, who spoke impeccable English, betrayed us at Aughrim. Benedict Arnold also spoke English and betrayed the American army to England while Irish was more widely spoken than English in that same Army of the Revolution. Spanish time-servers betrayed Spain to England at the coming of the Armada. French dastards speaking the purest of French betrayed France to England in every great battle they waged against each other, so that English valour won no battles, 'twas the bribe that won them all ! There is no need to draw further on the countless proofs of such perfidy, everywhere more prevalent than in Ireland. This, indeed, seems a case for the trite advice : 
Drink deep, or taste not, the Pierian spring! 
And here I have to leave my old friend Joe. Who next, I wonder.
