Irish history has for so long been used as a peg upon which to hang the prejudices of British politicians that there is a real danger of its true significance being obscured, and particularly is this the case with the struggle for supremacy in Ireland which followed the revolution of 1688. During recent years a great deal of work has been done upon Jacobitism in England and Scotland, and the issues at stake, as well as the forces arrayed against one another, have been pretty accurately estimated, but research on the same scale has not yet been applied to the struggle in the third kingdom which James II lost. The situation in Ireland was a great deal more favourable to the Jacobite cause on the morrow of the revolution than in either England or Scotland, for, whereas there the religion of James II and VII was a perpetual cause of offence, the Irish naturally liked him the better for being a Catholic. The country, too, as even Macaulay admitted, had been happier under the Restoration than for many a long year. The harshness that had characterised the rule of the Protectorate had given way to a policy of give and take that came very near to toleration where religion was concerned, and, although political control remained in Protestant hands, it was not, on the whole, exercised in an unduly objecttionable manner. The settlement of the land question had proved more difficult, and it had at last been effected by depriving the Cromwellian settlers of about a third of their holdings. In actual fact, moreover, the influence of the Celtic Irish tended to increase during the reign of Charles II, for the reason that a good many of the new landlords were absentee, and also because the difficulty of securing an adequate supply of other labour was found to be insuperable. The state of affairs which existed in Ireland could certainly not be described as ideal, but it might have afforded a basis for permanent peace under a wise and far-sighted administration, and it was assuredly a good deal better than the contemporary situation in Scotland. The accession of James should have been the prelude to a lasting settlement of all Irish problems, for the new monarch was of the same religion as one section of the population and of the same race as the other. Unfortunately for the future of Ireland he made no effort to hold the balance even, and he embarked upon that same policy of appointing his co-religionists to high office, too often quite irrespective of their other qualifications, which was doing him so much harm in England. In February, 1687, Richard Talbot, later Duke of Tyrconnel, was nominated Lord Deputy, and there could be no doubt what this meant. On the score of his family there was little that could be said against Talbot, but so far as his reputation was concerned there was a good deal. In extreme youth he had been one of the few survivors of the sack of Drogheda by Oliver Cromwell, and this event not unnaturally coloured his whole subsequent political outlook. Thereafter he became the leader of the Irish malcontents, and on one occasion he was sent to the Tower for his part in a plot to murder the first Duke of Ormonde. At the same time Tyrconnel was a man of great energy and of some ability, and he was aided by his wife, a sister of the redoubtable Duchess of Marlborough. When the revolution occurred in England, the Lord Deputy had, without great difficulty, held Ireland to its allegiance, and when James, on his arrival from France, met Tyrconnel at Cork on 14 March 1689, the Lord Deputy was in a position to report a very satisfactory military situation. The whole of Leinster, Munster, and Connaught was in Jacobite hands, and even in Ulster only Derry and Enniskillen, among the towns of any importance, acknowledged William. The plan of campaign, too, was clear enough, for it was to subdue the entire kingdom before the Dutchman could set foot in it, and then to send such a force to Scotland as would enable Dundee to obtain complete control of that country. Yet James had not been long upon Irish soil before he saw that his supporters were so divided that success would be extremely difficult. The English who were with him regarded Ireland as a mere stepping-stone to Whitehall, and they hoped to achieve that result without surrendering too much authority to the native Irish. Then there were the Anglo-Irish, comprising such families as the Dillons, Nugents, and Plunketts, who had long been resident in Ireland: they were, in fact, Irishmen, but owing to historical associations they had a definite allegiance to the British Crown. They were Catholics who were ready to fight to regain their lands and to re-establish the open practice of their religion, but they had no desire to sever the connection with England. Originally, indeed, they had regarded their Celtic fellow-countrymen with more than a little suspicion, but adversity during the Cromwellian persecution had done a good deal to modify this attitude. They were, in effect, Home Rulers, but they were not hostile to England. Next came the Gaels, who formed by far the largest part of the Jacobite army, and who were the most ardent supporters of the Stuarts. Their aim was to set up an independent Ireland, and they welcomed James as a means of achieving that end. In any scheme for the reconquest of England they were not interested at all. Lastly, there were the French, of whom the most important was D'Avaux, the ambassador of Le Grand Monarque. They were chiefly animated by the desire to attract William from the Low Countries to Ireland, and that with as little loss of life as possible among the subjects of King Louis. It was in short, a situation that might have daunted a statesman of the very first order, and, as it had to be faced by men of no outstanding ability it is hardly surprising that Jacobite hopes were more apparent than real. On 24 March 1689, James made his formal entry into Dublin. Tyrconnel, bearing the sword of state, preceded him, while surrounding him were the Comte d'Avaux, the Dukes of Powis and Berwick, and the Earls of Melfort and Granard. The King lost little time in getting down to business, and five proclamations soon made their appearance. The first commanded Protestants who had recently left the kingdom to return and accept the royal protection, under penalties for refusal. The second, directed against marauding, ordered all Catholics not belonging to any army to lay up their arms in their houses. A third called on the peasantry to bring in provisions for the troops. A fourth somewhat optimistically raised the value of money. A fifth summoned a parliament to meet in Dublin on May 7. While these events were taking place in the capital, hostilities were beginning in the field, and it is to these that it is now necessary to turn. First of all, however, the forces at the disposal of James must be taken into consideration. Charles II was responsible for the first English standing army of any size, and it was during his reign that the forces on the Irish establishment - namely, those maintained out of the Irish revenue - were considerably increased. In the last years of Charles further steps were taken to improve the efficiency of these troops. Originally they had been organised in companies of foot and troops of horse, and in 1682 their strength was seventy-five companies of foot and the Regiment of Guards, in all about 6,400 infantry and 1,382 sabres. In 1684 these companies and troops were formed into regiments, and the total number both of horse and foot was increased. Six new infantry regiments, each of thirteen companies, including a grenadier company, were raised, while a grenadier company was added to the Foot Guards and a troop of horse grenadiers to the Royal Horse Guards. During the reign of James II the exigencies of politics and religion did much to diminish the value of this force, and some of the best regiments were sent to England in 1688 to oppose the Dutch invasion. A French list of the following year gave the strength of the Jacobite army as eight regiments of horse, the same number of dragoons, and forty-four regiments of foot-in all about 35,000 men. Many of these formations, however, probably existed only on paper, for Tyrconnel put the infantry no higher than twenty-six battalions available for service just before the battle of the Boyne. Later in the war more new formations were embodied. There was plenty of work for the Jacobite army to do, for the Protestants of the north, mindful of what had happened in the forties, were in no mood to make their submission to James. The centre of resistance was Derry. Tyrconnel had withdrawn the garrison from the town to make up the contingent for service in England, and when he endeavoured to replace it the prentice youths compelled the reluctant authorities to close the gates. This act of defiance proved infectious, and Enniskillen followed the example of Derry, while appeals for help were sent to William. It was vital to the Jacobites to complete the occupation of the kingdom by the reduction of Ulster before the Dutchman could turn against them, and James had not yet reached Dublin when the first blows were struck at the insurgents in the north. On 14 March, 1689, Lieutenant-General Richard Hamilton, with a force largely composed of rapparees, scattered a body of Williamites at Dromore, in County Down, and a month later the Jacobites won another success at Clady, in County Tyrone. All seemed to be going well, and the reduction of Derry and Enniskillen appeared as good as accomplished, while far away in Scotland the clans were being called to arms by Dundee. At this point James, against the advice of D'Avaux and Tyrconnel, decided to proceed to Derry in person : in spite of all that has been alleged against him he was a merciful man, and he seems to have imagined that his presence would be sufficient to secure the surrender of the place without bloodshed. By this time Hamilton had already summoned the city to surrender, and the governor, Colonel Lundy, was disposed to hand it over, a course in which the corporation was not unwilling to concur. In effect, the position was that Lundy and the municipal authorities had announced their readiness to treat, but had stipulated that while negotiations were in progress the Jacobite forces were not to advance beyond St. Johnstown. At this point there took place one of those unfortunate mishaps which characterise the history of the later Stuarts. James appears to have been imperfectly acquainted with what was afoot, and without considering what was likely to be the effect of soldiers advancing beyond the agreed point, he appeared on Windmill Hill with an escort of dragoons. At once the cry of "treachery " went up in Derry, and it was believed that the King was leading an army of murderous Catholics to cut every Protestant throat. The mob rose; Lundy was removed from his post; and the defence was organised by the Rev. George Walker, rector of Donaghmore in County Tyrone, and a Mr. Baker. When, therefore, the royal trumpets rang out to give the summons they were answered by the fire of a cannon which killed an officer by the King's side. Having thus undergone the same unfortunate experience as his father in front of Hull nearly half a century before. James returned to Dublin with some loss of prestige, and left the war in the north to be carried on by others. The so-called siege of Derry has, like the battle of the Boyne, become to such an extent the sport of party politics that what really took place is in danger of being ignored. The plain fact is that there was no siege in any accepted meaning of the term, not even a blockade ; nor could there have been, given the strength of the rival forces. To quote Mr. Belloc, not an authority lightly to be disregarded where military matters are in question : 
"Within Derry there was actually a larger force of men and a very much better provision of artillery and firearms, and a larger amount of ammunition, than in the lines outside the town. If we put the thing in military terms, it is almost farcical: a larger, a better-equipped force contained behind its walls by a smaller and worse-equipped one, a formidable defensive attacked with inferior weapons that could not affect it : the besiegers working at a great distance from their ultimate base over very bad roads, the besieged handicappped by no distance over which to convey their munitions and arms : the besieged with ample housing, living under conditions of comfort so long as the provisions lasted, the besiegers in the open field under what was, at the beginning of the operations, abominable weather." 
Exact figures are not easy to obtain, but it is doubtful if the Jacobites had more than six thousand men before Derry, while the Williamite forces inside the city were almost certainly at least a thousand stronger. No less a soldier than Napoleon, it will be remembered, laid it down that a besieging army should be four times the strength of the garrison. Nor was this all, for the Jacobite rear was threatened from Enniskillen, and the lines of communication by the Williamite partisans who swarmed throughout Armagh, Monaghan, Tyrone and Cavan. In these circumstances it would seem to argue a lack of enterprise on the part of Walker and Baker that they allowed themselves to be shut up in Derry at all. The investment, if such a term may be applied to an operation in which the besiegers only possessed thirty shovels for digging their trenches, continued until the end of July, and during its later days food began to run short in the city. Horseflesh rose to 1s. 8d. a pound, and a "quarter of dog fattened by eating the bodies of the slain Irish " (to quote Walker himself) cost 5s. 6d. Help had been sent by William, but, mainly on account of adverse winds, the ships were held up in Lough Foyle with two veteran regiments on board. Such being the case, Conrad von Rosen, a German in the French service who was the Jacobite commander-in-chief, determined to try the effect of terrorism, and he told those within Derry that if they did not surrender the place by July l he would gather the rebels from all over the countryside, and drive them under the walls, where they would starve. He was as good as his word, and on the 2nd a great crowd of both sexes and all ages, including little children, was driven into the space between the Jacobite lines and the city. The not unnatural reply of Derry was to put up gallows on the walls, on which were to be hanged such prisoners as had been taken. The situation was saved by James himself. As soon as he heard what was intended he ordered it to be stopped, and a circular letter was sent to all his officers telling them to '' refuse obedience to any order of this nature from our Field-Marshal-General." He said that '' his honour as a King and the keeping of his word was to be preferred to the preservation of his throne," and he added that if Von Rosen had been his own subject he would have hanged him. In any event the end was not far distant. On July 28 the English vessels sailed up the Foyle, burst through the boom built by the besiegers, and reached the city. There was nothing more to be done, and on the 31st Von Rosen withdrew his forces. On the following day came the news that the Williamites of Enniskillen had won a notable success at Newtown Butler. These, however, were not the only reverses suffered by the Jacobites that July, for on the 27th Dundee was killed in the hour of victory at Killiecrankie, and his death marked the end of any scheme for a joint invasion of England from Scotland and Ireland. While these events were taking place in Ulster the parliament had been meeting in Dublin, and its proceedings afforded further evidence of the difficulty of the king's position, for the policy which he must pursue if he was to retain his hold over Ireland was precisely that which would do him immeasurable harm in the other two kingdoms. The parliament had a large majority of members who were determined to take advantage of the opportunity to right many an ancient wrong, and although it only sat until July 18 it passed no less than thirty-five measures. Some of these were harmless enough, but there were two that were calculated to drive every waverer in the British Isles into the Williamite camp. A Land Act restored to the representatives of its former owners all land confiscated since 1641, without compensation to those who had held it in the interval; while an Act of Attainder was passed against some sixty peers and 2,200 commoners. The first of these measures encountered some opposition in the Upper House, but in the circumstances of the time it is easy to understand the enthusiasm with which both bills were received: "Hell or Connaught" had certainly not been forgotten. All the same, the effect upon English and Scottish opinion was disastrous. The " fires of Smithfield " seemed about to be rekindled, and people were easily led to believe that the return of the dethroned monarch to England at the head of an Irish army would be the signal for a general massacre of Protestants. Such was the force of propaganda, for in actual fact not a single Catholic prelate had been summoned to the parliament in Dublin, while among those supporting James was the Protestant Primate of All Ireland, the Archbishop of Armagh, as well as the Protestant Bishops of Meath, Derry, Ossory, Limerick, Cork, Raphoe and Killala. The situation, then, by midsummer of 1689 was that the civil and military authority of James was firmly established in Leinster, Munster and Connaught, but that the failure to take Derry and Enniskillen had provided William with Ulster as a bridgehead into Ireland. Jacobite military inactivity was most marked after the failure in the north, although it must have been realised in Dublin that the death of Dundee had left William free to concentrate all his strength against Ireland, and he could not much longer ignore the threat to his flank, any more than Elizabeth had been able to ignore it a century before in her struggle with Spain. Some of the blame, however, must rest with Versailles, for the French never made any serious attempt to use their superiority at sea to prevent Williamite forces reaching Ireland, and they never followed up Chateaurenard's victory over Admiral Herbert in Bantry Bay in May. So old Marshal Schomberg, whom the revocation of the Edict of Nantes had caused to transfer his services from Louis to William, was not only allowed to land unopposed on 13 August, 1689, but was not prevented from occupying Belfast and Carrickfergus. His army, however, was too small to justify him in continuing his offensive, in spite of the alarm which his invasion had created in Dublin, and, as James had advanced to Drogheda with 20,000 men, Schomberg decided to go into winter quarters, which the Jacobites allowed him to do without serious molestation. In not bringing his enemy to battle, however, James may have been right, for the old marshal was too experienced a soldier to fight on any ground save that of his own choosing. During the ensuing winter and spring both sides prepared for what was clearly destined to be the final struggle. At the end of October, 1689, it was announced that Louis had decided to replace Von Rosen, who had become personally distasteful to James owing to his barbarous notions as to the conduct of war, by the Duc de Lauzun, recently pardoned for aspiring to the hand of La Grande Mademoiselle; with Lauzun were to come seven thousand French regulars and a considerable sum of money, though, in return, Louis had bargained for some good Irish regiments. The new French commander-in-chief reached Dublin on 12 April, and he was far from impressed by the state of affairs that he found there, for he wrote to Louvois, " C'est un chaos pareil a celui de la Genese avant la creation du monde." On the Williamite side also reinforcements poured into Ireland, among them seven thousand Danes who landed at Belfast in March, 1690 ; Dutch, Branden burgers, and some English quickly followed. In May, old Schomberg forced Charlemont to capitulate : situated on the Blackwater, five miles from Dungannon, it was the last strong place in Ulster which still held out for James, and its loss was serious. Schomberg gave the garrison the honours of war, and saw that they were observed, which was more than some other Williamite commanders did. On June 6 his son, Meinhart, disembarked at Belfast with a formidable train of artillery, while eight days later William himself landed at Carrickfergus, which he should never have been allowed to do had the French navy been up to its work. The main Jacobite force lay round Ardee ; before moving on them William concentrated at Loughbrickland, near where Banbridge now stands. The distance to Dublin, his objective, was approximately eighty miles, having regard to the roads available. When he began his advance to the south no serious effort was made to oppose him, although the line of the southern Ulster hills about Slieve Gullion might, one would have thought, have been considered as a possible delaying position. On the other hand, William might have been expected to be in a hurry, in view of his commitments elsewhere, to come to grips with his enemy, but he displayed no such desire. If the Jacobite withdrawal from north Louth was made in comparatively easy stages the Williamite advance was leisurely in the extreme. The Dutchman commenced his march on June 24, but he did not reach the Boyne until the 30th-that is to say that he took seven days to cover fifty miles. When he arrived at the Boyne he found the Jacobite forces drawn up along its southern bank. They held the line of the river from Oldbridge to a point approximately half a mile to the east, while Drogheda was occupied as a detached post by 1,300 men. Up the river from Drogheda there was no bridge before Slane, though there were several fords, notably one on the Jacobite left at Rosnaree. Behind the Jacobite position the then main road to Dublin-the only available line of retreat-ran through Duleek, which owing to the marshy ground on either side of the road formed such a bottleneck that two coaches could not pass. From Old bridge to Duleek the distance, as the crow flies, is about four and three-quarter miles, but it is nearly three-quarters of a mile shorter from Rosnaree. It was, therefore, clear that if a force which crossed the river at Rosnaree could push on to Duleek it stood a good chance of being able to cut off the retreat of troops holding the Oldbridge position. What is not easy to understand is why James decided to fight on the Boyne at all. Lauzun's instructions from Louvois were to avoid pitched battles, and to wear the enemy out. If a delaying action only was intended this, as we have seen, might with greater advantage have been fought further to the north, or even a few miles to the south. What is clear is that there were divided counsels in the Jacobite High Command, and James himself had become notorious for indecision in moments of crisis : it was many years since he had been the dashing subordinate of Turenne. In any event little or nothing was done to render the position defensible once the decision to fight had been taken. The garrison of Drogheda should have been used to protect the Jacobite right flank, but it might never have existed for all the part it played in the battle. No attempt seems to have been made to organise strong redoubts, although their importance in a defensive position was well appreciated in the French army at the time; nor was anything done to render the fords difficult or impossible, or to place any obstructions in the bed of the river. Furthermore, the Jacobite left flank was as exposed as the right. Richard Hamilton, at a conference on the evening before the battle, begged James to post a strong force at Rosnaree and Slane, but all that was done was to place a regiment of Irish dragoons under Sir Neil O'Neill at Rosnaree, and to leave the bridge at Slane quite unprotected. Finally, the question of a counter-attack never seems to have been considered at all. In these circumstances it is impossible not to agree with Mr. Belloc that the Jacobite position was weak. "The troops occupying it were in full view of an enemy on the northern bank ; it was approachable on many points at low tide ; it contained little opportunity, for cover behind which to gather reserves; it could be turned on the left by a superior force, and behind it was the narrow defile of Duleek.'' The forces under the command of James were of very uneven quality. The Irish army had, as we have seen, been considerably increased in strength since his accession, but the exigencies of politics had done much to diminish its military value. Tyrconnel purged it of Protestants, and the Catholics who replaced them were in many instances little, if anything, more than raw recruits when they were put to the test of battle. As if this was not enough, the same mistake was made in 1688 in Ireland as in Scotland, for some of the best regiments were sent to England, where they effected nothing, while their own country was deprived of their services when these were most needed. Finally, further good troops had been sent to France in the spring of 1690 in execution of an agreement between Louis and James as the price of the French king's support, and the glory which these first units of the Irish Brigade were soon to win on the continent was of little use to the Stuart cause in the land whence they came. As for the officers, Macaulay would have us believe that" many were cobblers, tailors, and footmen," while Dalton, in his Illustrations of King James's Army List, says, "A more noble host has seldom been submitted to review. Six of the colonels were peers, as were five of the captains. The other officers were sons of peers, baronets, or heirs of the oldest families as long as they had anything to inherit." The French infantry was at the Boyne in the shape of the regiments of Zurlauben (Swiss), Biron, Bouilly, Tirlon, and Chemerault-not Picardie and Auvergne, but first-class troops all the same. The Irish cavalry under Sarsfield were good in spite of their lack of training, but the Irish infantry and dragoons were little more than untrained mobs of undernourished civilians in uniform. Moreover, after their failures in Ulster the morale of the Jacobites was none too high. When one turns to the relative strength of the forces facing one another it is to be confronted with a variety of widely different estimates. The late Colonel O'Connell examined these for a number of years, and eventually put forward the proposition that the only way in which an approximately accurate account of the strength of the rival armies could be obtained was by accepting the figures given by each side of its own forces. On this basis he put the Williamites at 33,000 and the Jacobites at 21,000. There are, of course, other factors to be taken into consideration besides mere numbers, for the Williamites were much superior in artillery, and their morale was higher than that of at any rate a large part of the opposing army. William's forces were largely composed of trained professional soldiers from the continent who had plenty of experience of active service conditions. The corps d' elite was the brigade of Dutch Blue Guards under Solms, while also of excellent quality were a further Dutch force under the Prince of Nassau, two French Huguenot regiments, a brigade of English under Sir Thomas Hanmer, and a body of Danes. Finland, Brandenburg, and Switzerland were also represented in the Williamite ranks. In addition there were the northern Irish, flushed with their successes at Derry, Enniskillen, and Newtown Butler: that they played no important part in the ensuing battle was not their fault, but was due to the fact that no such role was cast for them by their commander. Not only was the army of William greatly superior in strength and training to that of his father-in-law but it was better posted, for the northern bank of the Boyne is excellently suited for the preparation of an offensive. It contains deep ravines opposite either end of what was the Jacobite position across the river, and in these depressions it was possible to gather large numbers of troops without being observed from the southern side. Having brought his enemy to battle it was clearly to the interest of William, given the general political and military situation, to use his superior strength to envelop and destroy him, but this was exactly what he failed to do. The truth is that William proved as indifferent a general in Ireland as he had shown himself to be in the Low Countries. Indeed, the generalship on both sides of the Boyne was mediocre, for if a Dundee had been in command of the Jacobites, or had Berwick been twenty years older, the result might have been very different. As it was, the only general who was in any way distinguished was old Schomberg, and he was killed during the course of the battle. After a careful examination of the position, during which he came within an ace of being killed, William decided upon his tactics. They were, after a preliminary bombardment, to make a strong frontal attack across the river at low tide upon the main Jacobite position on the higher ground at Donore, at the same time sending a force of about seven thousand cavalry and infantry to cross the river at Rosnaree and Slane, and then to push on to Duleek. The weather, it may be added, was perfect the whole time. The exact nature of the flank attack has presented the greatest difficulty to historians, and it is not easy to discover what really happened. Daylight was about four on that first day of July, and both armies were early astir. Mr. Belloc thinks that the flanking party under Meinhart Schomberg, son of the marshal, moved off not later than six, and he is probably right ; in actual fact at what ever time it started it was too late, for it should have been sent off on the previous evening if it was to prove really effective, and this blunder is the measure of William's competence as a general. Some three hours later James and Lauzun were informed that Meinhart Schomberg's infantry under the command of General James Douglas had crossed the bridge at Slane, and that his cavalry under his own hand had forced the ford at Rosnaree. What had happened in the mean time ? The certain fact is that O'Neill's dragoons had been routed; to quote the Due de la Force's biography of Lauzun : " Le canon avait rendu la position intenable pour le regiment de dragoons, qui, une heure durant, s'etait bravement battu, perdant beaucoup de monde et son colonel." This is a welcome, if unique, tribute to the valour of the dragoons, but in all else the Due de la Force is at fault. Meinhart Schomberg could not have been held up for an hour if the news of his crossing reached the Jacobite headquarters as early as nine o'clock, and there were no Williamite cannon in that part of the field : they were all firing on Donore preparatory to covering the crossing at Oldbridge. Nor is this all, for the Due de la Force confused Rosnaree with Slane- a mistake which he shared with many other commentators-and he placed the dragoons at the latter place, which, as we have seen, was not held by the Jacobites at all. What seems to have happened was that the infantry under Douglas were sent round by Slane, but that they were still too far away to threaten the line of retreat to Duleek: the cavalry were nearer, having forced the ford at Rosnaree, but they were held up, pending the arrival of the foot, by the fact that on the southern side of the ford the ground rises abruptly, thus rendering any purely mounted action impossible. James and Lauzun must have expected that this flanking movement might be attempted or they would not have posted the dragoons at Rosnaree; but where they made their mistake was in not attacking across the Boyne in the direction of Tullyallen as soon as Meinhart Schomberg's force had been sufficiently detached from the main Williamite army to be beyond recall. Napoleon would have exacted the maximum penalty from William for this move in the face of an enemy, and Montrose or Dundee would have made him pay dearly. Even if the Jacobite commanders regarded the whole affair as a delaying action it was their duty to strike this blow, but either their competence or their intelligence was at fault, and they thought solely in terms of the defensive. At the same time Lauzun at once appreciated the threat to his left flank contained in the news which reached him at nine o'clock, and he moved the whole of the French, and some of the Irish, infantry, together with Sarsfield's cavalry, along the southern bank of the river towards Rosnaree. This left some 24,000 Williamites facing the 14,000 Jacobites on the Boyne and at Donore. By this time James had withdrawn his guns, and it might have been better had he withdrawn the troops along the riverbank as well. As for the defence on Donore, that was now reduced to eight battalions under Richard Hamilton, and to the cavalry on the right under Berwick; both these generals were nominally under the orders of Tyrconnel, but in reality each was responsible for his own actions. By ten o'clock the state of the tide was such that the river could be crossed, and the brigade of Dutch Blue Guards, with fifty drums beating, entered the water upon a front of ten men. The Irish fired one volley, and then broke, as might have been expected of raw troops brought face-to-face with experienced veterans. To the left of the Dutch were the Huguenots; next came the English contingent under Hanmer; then there were Danes and more Dutch. All these successfully made the crossing, and before long there were something like ten thousand Williamites to the south of the Boyne. From this moment the fighting became not a little confused. On the Jacobite left Meinhart Schomberg was still waiting for his infantry who had crossed the river at Slane, and was himself being closely watched by Lauzun and Sarsfield. In the centre the Williamite troops who had reached the southern bank of the Boyne were reforming for an attack on the Donore position, and were being repeatedly charged by the Jacobite horse. Berwick in particular distinguished himself by his fiery valour, for he held up the Blue Guards by a successful charge, and he threw the Danes back into the river. Numbers, however, began to tell, and William himself, with the English cavalry, commenced to work round the right flank, which should, of course have been protected by Drogheda. By noon it was clear that a decision had been reached, and that the time had come for the Jacobites to withdraw. The retreat was very well managed. Douglas joined up with Meinhart Schomberg about noon (and soon afterwards lost his life), and from that moment the threat to Duleek became very real. Lauzun, however, marched parallel with the Williamites, and it was the defensive who won that critical race. As the Jacobite infantry fell back on Duleek the horse drew up behind them as a rear-guard and checked William's somewhat ineffectual attempts at pursuit. Hamilton turned on his pursuers in the neighbourhood of Platin Hall, and chased them right back to their main body, until he was himself forced to withdraw. In consequence the Irish foot were able to pass unmolested through Duleek, and the French battalions followed them without losing any of their cohesion. That the Jacobite army would not have got away, at any rate without being severely mauled, had William been a more enterprising commander is probably true, but that in no way detracts from the skill and bravery shown by the French and Irish in covering the retreat. How ineffective was the effort at pursuit can be gauged by the orderly arrival of the Jacobite forces in Dublin. The first few mounted stragglers reached the capital about five o'clock on the day of the battle, and about sunset James arrived at the Castle escorted by Sarsfield's cavalry ; the bulk of the Jacobite infantry followed him between then and midnight. As for the rearguard, it made its appearance in the early hours of the following morning : the cavalry moved in formation and by units, with trumpets sounding, at the walk, and finally there marched to tuck of drum the regiments of Louis XIV in perfect order, though tired. At no time did the retreat degenerate into anything like a rout. It only remains to add that William himself entered Dublin on July 6. As for the casualities, it is not easy to arrive at any agreed figure. Macaulay put them at 1,500 on the Jacobite side, and at 500 (including old Schomberg) on the Williamite ; most subsequent historians have been content to repeat this estimate without comment and, one suspects, without verification. More recently Mr. Belloc, while adopting Macaulay's figure for the Jacobites, has put the Williamite casualties as high as 2,000. To the credit of his Irish subjects must be placed the fact that the flight of James, and the fall of the capital, were very far from putting an end to the war. The loss of Dublin had been followed by that of the rest of Leinster, which Lauzun had refused to defend, and Waterford surrendered on July 24. On the other hand Munster and Connaught remained in Jacobite hands, and through the harbours of Cork, Kinsale, Limerick, and Galway communications could be kept open with France. Furthermore, William was alarmed by the threat to England caused by the French victory at Beachy Head on June 30, and he was compelled to send more troops back there after the capture of Waterford. Indeed, for a brief space it even looked as if the Boyne had been, from the Williamite point of view, fought in vain, but the French made no attempt to follow up their success, and the Dutch man decided to finish the Irish war before turning his attention elsewhere. His object was to drive the Jacobites into Munster, and thereby deprive them of the ports, particularly of Galway, which was the chief channel of communication with France. The capture of Limerick would turn the line of the Shannon, and to that William now devoted himself. On this news Lauzun, believing that the town could not be held, led the French troops back to Galway, where they were soon embarked for their own country. The Irish held different views, and they determined to defend Limerick. The hero of their resistance was Patrick Sarsfield, soon to be created Earl of Lucan for his services to the Stuart cause. Of both Celtic and Anglo-Irish descent, he was the Bayard of the Jacobite wars, and his enthusiasm was infectious. A successful raid, in the course of which he surprised a convoy and captured William's siege guns, enormously weakened the attack and encouraged the defenders of Limerick. An attempt to carry the walls by storm was a failure, and on 30 August, 1690, the siege was raised. Unhappily for the Jacobites a greater than William - namely John Churchill - was now placed in command of the forces opposed to them. He saw at once where their weakness lay, and determined to take advantage of the fact.[note: There is also reason to believe that he possessed information, possibly denied to William, that the places he proposed to attack were incapable of any sustained defence.]
 A rapid blow at the Munster ports before the end of the campaigning season was brilliantly successful; Cork was forced to surrender on September 28, and Kinsale capitulated little more than a fortnight later. The war was not, indeed, lost, but the outlook was far from encouraging. The strategy on both sides in the campaign of 1691 was the logical outcome of the events of the preceding year. The authority of James had been reduced to Connaught and north-west Munster and the Jacobite aim was to hold the line of the Shannon, thereby protecting Galway and Limerick, the last two ports of any size still in their possession. The focal points were Limerick and Athlone, for they both covered crossings of the river. The rival commanders were changed. William had not appointed a Lord-Lieutenant, and the civil government was in the hands of the Lords Justices, while the military command was entrusted to Godert van Ginkel. James, on the other hand, had conferred the Lore-Lieutenancy on Tyrconnel, whose tireless energy was one of the main factors in keeping up the struggle. Unsavoury as many of the incidents of his earlier life undoubtedly were, he very largely a toned for them now by the zeal which he displayed in his master's service. There were no French troops on this occasion, but Louis sent some money and a general, Saint-Ruth. During the winter and early spring the Jacobite forces were reorganised, and a spirit of renewed hope began to animate their ranks. At the same time Saint-Ruth had no alternative but to remain on the defensive, for Ginkel had fifty thousand men under arms at Mullingar, so the French general could only garrison the chief towns on the Shannon, and manoeuvre in their support with such troops as were at his disposal. Ginkel, too, had decided on different strategy from that of William in the previous year, for in May he advanced on Athlone, which, in spite of the efforts of Saint-Ruth, he captured by a coup de main on June 30. The Frenchman immediately broke his camp and retired towards Ballinasloe. To quote Dr. Hayes McCoy : "Having lost Athlone three main courses of action were open to him. He could blockade Ginkel in the town, divide his forces and retire on Limerick and Galway, or risk an encounter in the field. His own inclination was to give battle, primarily because he had been taken by surprise at Athlone and was impatient of an opportunity for revenge. Tyrconnel and Sarsfield held that the Irish foot should retreat to Limerick and that the cavalry should be sent into Leinster to threaten the English line of communications with Dublin. Saint-Ruth prevailed, and, having made no attempt to defend the passages over the River Suck, chose Aughrim as his field of battle." There the greatest pitched battle in Irish history, with the possible exception of Clontarf, was fought on Sunday, 12 July, l691. The two armies were of approximately equal strength-that is to say, that each was about twenty thousand strong and the Jacobite position was carefully chosen. James's forces occupied the ridge stretching southward from Aughrim village, with their left resting on the ruined castle, and their right on a stream beyond Kilcommodan church. The ground sloped away before their centre to a boggy tract intersected by another stream. A frontal attack by hostile cavalry was impossible, while horse could only approach the left by "an old broken causeway, only large enough for two horses to pass it at a time,'' and on the right the " pass " of Urachree, being difficult ground, was easily defended. On neither wing was the ground on the Jacobite side of the approach sufficiently extended for a large force to deploy. On the left the causeway opened into a flat cornfield in front of the castle, where not more than four battalions could form a front; on the right there was more space, but still not enough for any great force. The Jacobites were drawn up in two lines of infantry regiments along the brow of the hill, with the cavalry on either wing. Further back, in the left rear, Sarsfield was posted with a reserve of horse, out of sight of the field of battle and with instructions from Saint-Ruth, with whom he was not on good terms, not to move without orders. The Jacobites remained on the defensive, and thus forced their opponents to attack in peculiarly difficult circumstances. A ding-dong struggle produced something like stalemate. The Irish Fight wing held, and the Irish foot in the centre behaved so well that Saint-Ruth declared he would beat the enemy back to the gates of Dublin. Only on the Jacobite left had the Williamites won any success, but this meant that they could bring their cavalry to bear against the Irish foot, and that in a flank attack. Saint-Ruth realised the threat, and resolved to meet it before it could develop. He had plenty of horse or the purpose, but for some reason he omitted even to acquaint Sarsfield with the cource of events. As Saint-Ruth rode over to take command of the charge he stopped for a moment to direct the fire of a battery. He was just moving on when a ball from the Williamite lines, at extreme range struck him dead. The death of Saint-Ruth converted what might well have become a Jacobite victory into a Jacobite defeat. No one seemed able to take the dead man's place ; the projected counter charge was never made; and the Williamite attack was pressed home. As for Sarsfield, his first knowledge of what had taken place is said to have been conveyed by the fugitives streaming over the hill. It was not only the battle that was lost but also the war, and the decision was reached at Aughrim, not at the Boyne. The victorious Ginkel marched straight on Galway, which, after a show of resistance, capitulated on July 22. He then turned on Limerick, where Tyrconnel had just died, and which Sarsfield was defending. It was not, however, decreed that Limerick should hold out successfully for James a second time, and with its surrender on terms, which the victors soon violated, the three years' struggle came to an end. 
