Sitting under the apologetic tatters
of the Gato Negro's sun-awning,
at a table that provided an incomparable
view of the gas-works,
slaughter-house and Presidencia of the
little visited and rarely missed Central
American city of Puerto de San Froilan,
Senor Gil Lerida at last told me the story
which Alick, the purser of the Caribbean
Line had promised was worth hearing.
Senor Gil, expert guide, vagabond and
expensive friend of explorers and trade
drummers, told it in his own way, emptying
his tot of cachaca and beginning
abruptly: This gringo is not as anybody
I have met. He is lanky. He has a neck
long beyond his collar. His skin is apple-English
but he wears black clothes like
a Spaniard who knows how to be careful
in the sun. Then his eyes. Basta ! They
are strange. Not blue Yankee. Not dark
Spanish, but gray, you might say. But
such a gray. They have a lustre. They
have a something, a fixed brilliance that
makes one shrink like an unconfessed
soul before an angel.
Look ! I am at my table at the Gato
Negro, as now. I have the gravest preoccupation
of mind. I am asking myself
am I going to be lucky, or must I work ?
.... It is a matter of rent owing and
other things ; serious, yes, but it is also
siesta. I doze. Presently I dream. Am
in the High Sierra once again, but with a
strange Americano. We are hunting for
gold. And after a hard search we find
it in a hidden place. Fuego ! What a
find it was. Riches beyond all rents.
Riches beyond dreams. Riches beyond-
But it is there I wake up, and he is
beside me.
How he came there : from whence he
came, I do not know. He has made no
sound. He has not spoken. He is there,
long, still and black at my elbow. I even
shiver a little. There is that of the
mystic about it. Is it an answer to
my need?
Without moving, without lifting his
eyes he asks : '' Senor Gil Lerida ? ''
His Spanish is excellent: he is human
then. Yet I cannot place him. Or his
age. He seems grown and strong in a
bony way, and yet immature of the
world. I prudently ask what he wants
with Senor Gil Lerida ? He seems too
shy to speak, he only puts a letter on the
table. It bears my name and city in
typewriting. I read it. It is from my
old friend Ignatio Maguire of Timothy
City, America, whom, three times, I have
taken into the high mountains to hunt
for metal under the cover of shooting
wild goat. He asks me to render my
good services on similar lines to his friend
Corral Kevin Huiginn.
[Here I interrupted Senor Gil: "An
Irishman ? '' I asked. '' It will transpire,''
he answered loftily, and his story went
on.]
With the dream in his mind Senor Gil's
heart naturally leapt at what seemed to
him an unmistakably good omen. He
begged Conal Huiginn to be seated,
bought him a glass of vino tinto with his
last peso, and placed himself unreservedly
at his service. Corral sat and drank and
said without raising his eyes : " Mr.
Maguire told me how, on one of your
journeys in the High Sierra, you took
him to a lonely valley in which there
lived a strange community of Indians.
That is, though they appeared to be
Indians many had Irish names, while
their language still had many old Gaelic
words. . . . Well, that is where I wish
to go."
All this was quite true. Remote
though these Indians were, they were not
unknown to the people of San Froilan,
who had treated them as a matter of
course until Ignatius Maguire, who was
something of an ethnologist, had noted
their marked Irish traits. He had, in
fact, written about them in the American
press, and for a period the papers of the
world were full of them and of speculations
as to their origin. It was generally
agreed that they must be descendants of
Irish men and women transported to the
Caribbean countries as plantation slaves
in Elizabethan or Cromwellian times.
They must have intermarried with natives
and at some time or other, moved inland
in a body to this lonely mountain valley,
probably for safety, where gradually
their Irish characteristics had become
more and more submerged by native
blood and conditions.
Senor Gil admitted he knew the
strange tribe, but not with enthusiasm.
To reach them meant a long, hard and
unprofitable journey, for experience had
taught him that this was not a neighbourhood
for finding gold. When Conal
Huiginn revealed himself as a poor man
with scarcely enough money to allow
for pickings on the side, Senor Gil's disinclination
increased almost to the point
of an emphatic ' No.'
Yet he did not say it, though he found
it difficult to explain to me why he didn't.
It had, it seems, something to do with
the way Corral Huiginn had looked at
him. Just as he was about to refuse the
strange fellow had lifted his eyes and
looked him square, and it seemed like
the impact not of an evil, but of a fateful
eye. Something in that still and brilliant
glance had its way with him. It was the
look of a mystic, a seer, of one able to
gaze beyond the world and see things
not revealed to human men. Whatever
it was, it had remarkable effect, for
Senor Gil yielded. He agreed to take
Corral Huiginn and his strange box to the
Indian valley.
True he had not seen the box then,
did not see it until it was perched on top
of the two battered suitcases that made
Corral Huiginn's baggage on the deck
of the rickety little river steamer that
was to carry them the first part of their
journey inland. Even then it seemed
to stand out as an odd and ominous
article.
It had a curious shape of ancient design,
and seemed to be fashioned of very
old, worn leather on which could be seen
traces of queer, scroll-like designs in
faded colours. This alone was enough
to attract attention. When it was seen
that the leather formed but a skin over
strong iron, that it was secured with

But it is there I wake up, and he is beside me

equally strong padlocks, the box became
a focus of not too healthy interest.
Conal Huiginn's attitude towards
it turned that into something worse.
This happened just after the boat had
started and they were waiting to be
allotted the pest-holes that served as
cabins. A woman walking the deck
became curious about the strange appearance
of the box. She bent to look at it,
even stretched a hand out to touch the
faded leather. Conal Huiginn cried out in
a sort of fury, as though her touch might
be contaminating; startled, the woman
looked up and met eyes so full of fury
that she backed away in terror, crossed
herself and fled.
Word of this happening went round
the boat like a flash. The strange box
became an object of whispered speculation
: it contained treasure ; it contained,
since its owner was an explorer, charts
to hidden wealth, and so on. The
whispers led to trouble. There were
three attempts to steal it on the voyage.
Each time Conal Huiginn was able to
save it almost by a miracle. The last
time particularly. He got up from
the midst of his dinner and went to his
cabin just in time to meet a man slipping
out with the box in his hand. Exactly
what happened nobody ever knew except
that the thief, who was a particularly
large and hefty man, was found unconscious
outside the cabin door and even
on recovery was in such a state of fear
that he fled from the steamer at the next
stopping place. Conal Huiginn himself
returned to the table carrying the box
by its handle. He set it between his feet
and finished the meal with an unruffled
calm.
This increased the sense of mystery
and magic that surrounded Conal Huiginn
and his box. Mystery because of the
immense significance he plainly attached
to the box. Magic because the passengers
whispered themselves into a conviction
that there was something that enabled
him to know-to feel-when anything
was happening to the box. Hadn't his
back been turned toward the woman
when she tried to touch the box ? Hadn't
he been at dinner when something told
him that the box was in danger in his
cabin ? The box began to grow into
an object of almost uncanny balefulness,
so that Senor Gil was glad when they
reached the end of their river journey at
Magradore : “ A few more days on that
boat and we would have been thrown
overboard in sacks as witches," he said.
But the mystery of the box helped to
make the journey more bearable for
Senor Gil himself. He might not believe
in magic but it did seem plain to him that
the meaning of Conal Huiginn's journey
was bound up with that box, or what it
contained, while the passion with which
the Irishman protected it made it equally
plain that it could be no small thing.
Whether it was the secret of lost mines,
or long-hidden treasure, time alone
would tell, but whatever it was it must
certainly be very important.
From Magradore they struck through
the jungle to the mountains, handling
their five mules themselves. It was the
usual trying journey of fact which is so
different from fiction; hot, exacting and
unheroic. In the jungle the heat lay
like a hot wet rag upon their hearts and
lungs, the vines clawed or whipped them
with sharp or slimy fingers ; a multitude
of insects with iron and irritant jaws bit
them or burrowed under their skins.
As they dim bed clear of the tropic
bush the heat changed from dampness
to a dry ferocity that came off the rock
as from the sides of an oven, while the
track wound like a ribbon between rock
walls and precipices. In both these
tests Conal Huiginn came out well. His
spare figure had a stamina and resilience
that was, in Senor Gil's experience, extranormal,
as though he drew on the strange
power that lay behind his seer's gaze - or
within the box, which now he carried
slung across his back by a strap. Indeed,
he seemed to go forward with an increasing
buoyancy of spirit the nearer they came
to the goal he sought ; until, turning the
shoulder of a cliff, Senor Gil was able to
halt, and with a triumphant gesture of
his hand, show him the village stretched
out in the trough of the valley beneath.
Conal Kevin Huiginn looked long at
it, and then he said evenly ; " But this
is not the place ! ''
Senor Gill thought he must be taken
aback by the unprepossessing squalor of
the village, which, indeed, had a soul-depressing atmosphere of decay and
hopelessness. He said:
" It is so. It is the end of our journey.
We have arrived !"
The Irishman bent a deeper glance on
the scattered erections of palm-thatch
on poles that made the huts, and at the
slack, indifferent-eyed men and women
who lounged about them. Then he said
with Even more decision : " No, this is
not the place."
" It is veritably the place. The precise
one Senor Ignatio told you of," Senor
Gil said tartly. " For I brought him
here-and there is no other.''
"No," frowned Corral Huiginn. "It
can't be."
" Because it is not pretty, eh ? " jeered
Senor Gil.
" No, not that. I did not expect
that ... It's-it's this can't be it ... "
"Sentiment !" jerked Senor Gil, now
angry. "Come, I show you."
He led the way into the valley. He
went straight to the headman's hut and
the group of brown men gathered about
it. He questioned them in pigeon-Indian.
All the answers were as he expected
These were indeed the Irish
Indians. They knew of no others like
them, anywhere in this land, and as they
answered in a queer brogue Conal's face
grew troubled.
"Gaelic words," he said. "And they
have the lilt. Their features, too. Under
their darkness they might be men of the
Western Isles. And yet-and yet they
aren't right."
Senor Gil, though ruffled, could pity
him. He saw how desolated the young
man was. He had been living in a dream,
and had been awakened by rude reality.
He had, no doubt, built up an idyllic
picture of what these lost Irish would be,
and their savagery was a shock to him.
He just couldn't believe it. He began
to speak Gaelic to them, hoping it would
be more helpful than Senor Gil's jungle
lingua franca, but though they understood
words and phrases here and there,
they found the language more difficult
than Senor Gil's. Even when they
brought forward a very old woman, who
remembered Gaelic better than the
others, he got nothing helpful from her.
She remembered her grandfather telling
her that his forefathers had been
driven out of a beautiful green land
across the great waters. They had
suffered bondage and cruelties as plantation
slaves. Many married native
women, and these had told them of this
high valley as a place where they might
live free and safe. Presently there had
been battles, and in the midst of them
they had been able to slip away from
their bondmasters to this place. Here
they had dwelt since, marrying other
Indians, and intermarrying ... No, there
were no others like them.
Conal Huiginn could get nothing
different out of her, however much he
tried to quicken her memory, and day
by day he became more and more a lost
man-yet a lost man who has yet to
have his stubbornness broken. He refused
to give up his dream though his
ceaseless questions brought him nothing.
His wild, long tramps through the hills
in search of he knew not what, only
brought him back to the village exhausted
and more dejected than ever.
Yet it was from one of these long and
lonely explorations that he came back
with a new light in his face, a new eagerness
in his manner. He went straight to
the headman, and with fingers that shook,
opened a notebook he always carried and
showed a drawing he had made. Senor
Gil, looking over his shoulder saw that
it was the outline of a mountain range,
with an odd-shaped double tooth standing
up at one place. Pointing to this,
Conal asked the headman if he knew it.
The headman knew it well, wasn't it
on the line of crests to the north ? It
was called The Gate That Led Nowhere - because
that was what it was. It looked
like a pass that should lead over the
mountains, but when you reached it you
could go no further. There was only a
mass of barren rock down which no
living thing could climb. With the light
dwindling again in his face Conal
Huiginn asked: "Are you sure? Directly
I saw it I seemed to know . . . . "
'' Know ?'' asked Senor Gil. '' How
could you know ? And why ? "
" It seemed a pass that men must
use," said the Irishman.
"No man has ever been beyond it,"
said the headman. "This we have always
known. We hold that the world
ends there."
But the old woman who had been
peering at the drawing, suddenly began
to speak. She spoke in the sing-song
of her Indian Gaelic, and Conal, listening
eagerly, suddenly repeated words she
had uttered-they sounded like Tir
tairngiri. Yes, she smiled, Tir tairngiri,
and ran on again as though reciting,
until he stopped her with an exclamation
as she spoke words, sounding like Ard Ri.
" Ard Ri - the High King ? '' he cried
to Senor Gil. "Do you know what she
is saying? She is remembering that
when she was a small girl her grandfather
called that pass in the mountains the
way to Tir tairngiri, which in Gaelic
means the Land of Promise, or of the
Blest. You find it in the old Irish legends
. . . . St. Brendan the Navigator
searched for it. Yet these people actually
gave that name to some place beyond
that pass-or to the memory of it; for
she says that before her grandfather's
day there was a great anger in the earth,
mountains rocked and hills fell downan
earthquake, no doubt. After that the
place became as it is now, a wilderness
of rocks through which no man could
pass, so that presently its very name
went from memory. But before then,
her grandfather said, it had been a
valley of wondrous beauty, where fat
cattle roamed in rich pastures and men
lived in contentment and plenty under
the kindly rule of High Kings .....
The High King, that is how the Irish
spoke of their greatest leader in olden .
times .... "
"And all wiped out by an earthquake,"
shrugged Senor Gil. " If it was ever
there."
"We can go and see anyhow," said
Conal Huiginn.
"Meaning you don't believe it was
wiped out ? " Senor Gil said shrewdly :
" Is this, in fact, the place you came
to find ? "
"It is four full days' journey away,"
Conal Huiginn said, veiling his eyes.
"We could start at dawn to-morrow."
It was not difficult to reach The Gate
That Led Nowhere, once they had plotted
their bearings, but it was a harsh journey,
without vestige of trail and with the
altitude mounting steadily until they
were well above the tree belt on ground
torn and rock-bestrewn as a result, no
doubt, of earthquakes. Yet it was here
that they came at intervals upon the faint
remains of a track on the gouged and
broken surface, and their spirits rose, if
only because they were thus able to get
their mules right up to the ' gate ' itself.
But at the gate disappointment chilled
them. The track carried them through
a rock-jumbled canyon at the crest of
the mountain on to a platform on the
far side, and from that the earth dropped
sheer for some 300 feet, as though the
earthquake had cut the mountain side
with a giant knife. There was no getting
down that smooth face, nor was there
much inducement to try. All they could
see below was scorched and jagged rock,
sun-flayed and desolate like a world
deserted of life after the Final Judgment.
The craggy walls of the pass besides
limiting their view were as unclimbable,
though higher up they were slashed and
broken with ledges and crevices. The
whole scene was so desolate and so final
that Senor Gil felt it too cruel to jeer.
He watched the gray look of hopelessness
deepen on Conal Huiginn's face, and set
himself to make camp. Evening was
upon them, and this was as good a place
as any. He tethered the mules to
houlders, unloaded them and began to
prepare a meal.
Conal Kevin Huiginn remained like a
man of stone staring down at his lost
dream. Even when Senor Gil called he
came with dragging feet. He ate little,
sat huddled staring at the rocky ground.
Only when Senor Gil began to lay out
their sleeping bags did he stir. He rose
listlessly, went to the baggage and lifted
up the iron box.
Senor Gil watched spellbound. He
had been right then, the secret of this
strange business was in that mysterious
box. He could scarcely contain his
excitement as Conal Huiginn unlocked
the padlocks. . . . He was going to
study again the plans, the papers, the
clues, whatever they were, that had
impelled him to take this extraordinary
Journey. At last its riddle was to be
solved ...
Conal Kevin Huiginn opened the box
and drew out a harp.
A small, eight-stringed Irish harp of
ancient shape. Nothing more. He
dropped the box indifferently, went to
his sleeping sack and, squatting on it,
fingered the strings until he had got
them in tune. Then he began to sing.
He sang in a clear, fine carrying voice
and went on singing.
Senor Gil, almost outraged by this
tame climax to the box's mystery, glared
at him with angry eyes. Conal Huiginn
was beyond noticing. He sang in his unintelligible
Gaelic, long, sad, wailing
songs. Their notes filled the canyon with
weeping lament. Now and then the
song worked up into a wild, dramatic
skirl that echoed and rang along the
rocky walls and seemed to project itself
like a trumpet blast from the canyon
as though striving to reawaken the dead
in the barren valley beneath. Even
Senor Gil felt a leaping of his pulse at its
high challenge, and when it was finished
he asked what it was.
" It is a song of my people. It is one
of the oldest and most beautiful songs
of Ireland," Conal Huiginn told him, and
began to sing again.
He went on singing, as though song
alone could soothe the anguish of his
disappointment, but Senor Gil had heard
enough, he fell asleep. How long he
slept he did not know, but when he
opened his eyes the singing had stopped
and Conal Kevin Huiginn lay face downward
on the ground.
For a moment Senor Gil thought he
must have died singing-of a broken
heart. Then the shock turned to fear.
He realised that though it was still dark
he could see because there was a light
about him, the red light of torches, and
that tall men held them. Not Indians
though, but lean, strong white men.
They wore thick shag mantles hooded
and fringed in bright colours, over saffron
shirts and kilts . Their torches were of
reeds steeped in grease .
The light glistening on his eyes told
them he was awake. One of the men ,
whose mantle was fastened with a brooch
of gold, came to his side and spoke in a
language Senor Gil could not understand.
But Conal Huiginn could. He rolled over
and sat up and answered fluently, for the
language was Gaelic. As he spoke the
watchfulness of the strangers relaxed,
and presently, when he lifted his harp,
their manner became actually respectful.
Soon he turned to Senor Gil with a radiant
face:
" It is all right. It is as I hoped.
There is nothing to fear. Though we
must go with them now and see the
Ard Rí."
Senor Gil stood up too, and as he
wriggled out of his sleeping bag he lifted
his pistol belt to buckle it on. The man
with the gold brooch spoke. Conal
Huiginn said: " You must leave all your
weapons here. They will be safe."
" We cannot risk going unarmed,"
Senor Gil objected.
" Here, yes, " Conal laughed. " There
are no weapons where we are going. No
killing, no fighting. That has been outlawed
for generations ."
He explained, too, that they must be
blindfolded for a little while, since the
way to the valley was a secret upon
which the people's safety depended.
Hoods of the heavy shag were drawn
over their heads and, hands guiding
them, they were walked back along the
canyon. Or was it forward? With
sight cut off it was impossible to tell.
Then a rope was slipped under Senor Gil' s
armpits , and for fully a minute he was
drawn up through the air. Then firm
rock under his feet again, and a walk,
while their steps rang out as though
passing through a tunnel.
The muffling cloth was taken from their
eyes , and they were in a rock-hewn room,
with long, glassless windows looking
out into the night. The room was lit
by many bowls of bees-wax with stout
wicks. It had a rough table on which
stood horn drinking cups, boards and
counters of some sort of game. There
was a great illuminated book on a stand
from which someone seemed to have been
reading to the company. There was a
magnificent crucifix upon one wall.
There were benches and rugs about, as
though the men found the altitude chill.
After more talk with the gold-brooched
officer, Conal Huiginn told Senor Gil
that as he was not Irish he would not
be allowed to go with him when he was
taken to see the Ard Rí. He would have
to remain here, in the guard house of the
place until Conal returned. He would
be safe and kept in comfort. Senor Gil
was then taken to a little windowless
cell, where he slept the night on a stone
ledge made soft and comfortable with
many rugs. He noted that a guard was
stationed at his door.
When he awoke it was daylight. Going
into the main room he found several of the
guard sitting and eating, they made room
for him in friendly fashion, and he and
they were served with food and drink by
three women as tall and as handsome as
goddesses. They smiled quietly at him ,
and, like the men, seemed to possess the
calm and unruffled poise of great content ..
The drink they gave him was rather thin
to his palate-a sort of small beer or
mead. But the food was superb. During
his stay he had cooked meats of all kinds
to choose from, beautiful white bread ,
fruits of an infinite and luscious range,
eggs, cream dishes, vegetables in infinite
variety cooked exquisitely in butter
and sauces .
Foods from a land of milk and honey ,
that seemed plain, and when he went to
the great glassless windows he saw it was.
so. He looked down not upon the bleak
desert of rock he had seen from the pass,
Then he began to sing
but on such a land as that which must
have gladdened the eyes of Moses, when,
at God's command, he climbed Mount
Nebo and looked out over Chanaan. A
dazzling land. Green, suave and rich.
Orchards shining with fruit, vast golden
fields of grain ; tamed woods and streams
in sparkling ribbons, flowers in banks
and clusters of radiant colours, and over
all the sleek and mighty sweep of grasslands
over which immense herds and
flocks drifted indolently.
A land strange as well as marvellous.
Queer round towers standing up like
gray, extinguisher-tipped shafts ; stone
houses with thatched roofs, singly, or
collected into straggling villages ; stone
churches everywhere. He saw men working the fields with leisurely teams of oxen,
Cavalcades on superb horses went swiftly
along roads. The colour, charm, the
natural riches and the deep peace of it all
seemed sweet to the very sight.
He decided that this valley must lie
to the side, round a corner as it were,
from the pass. The earthquake had done
none of the damage here that the view
from the pass suggested. It had, however, shut that way in for ever. That
the survivors in this valley had devised
another exit through this rock-hewn
chamber was obvious, though what form
it took Senor Gil could not see and was
never to know.
He remained at the window watching
the changes in beauty of this gracious
land as the sun wore through the day.
He heard a faint, far off whisper of bells,
and saw men and women stringing their
way to the churches. He saw children
like a sudden puff of feathers, burst from
what must be a school, and go dancing
and floating across fields to their homes.
He saw men gather under trees for a mid
day meal. A procession like a gilded
chain, with torches and banners and
shining vestments passed into and out
of view. In one field two teams of men
rushed hither and thither driving an
object, a ball perhaps, towards goals
with broad-ended sticks. In the late
afternoon men in some sort of uniform
robe, rode through the valley, pausing
at groups of houses or people, to make
some sort of proclamation, and then rode
on. As evening came, men and women
came from these houses and moved in
gathering streams to some point of
general meeting Senor Gil could not see.
. . . . Later, when night had come,
there was a great sound of music and
singing of the kind he had heard from
Conal Huiginn.	
Conal Huiginn did not reappear that
day. Senor Gil might have been anxious,
had the guards and the women not
treated him with unaffected friendliness,
though they could not understand each
other. It was not until next morning
that Conal Kevin Huiginn came.
He was a transfigured Conal Huiginn.
He wore robes and linen undergarments
like the other men, but they were richer
and gold-tasselled. He wore a chaplet of
some sort of leaves about his head. He
came to say that he was staying but that
Senor Gil was free to return to the coast.
"You have found what you sought?"
Senor Gil asked.
Conal answered him strangely : '' I
have found more than I hoped.''
'' Riches ? ''
'' Not as you count riches,'' Conal
smiled back. "There is no wealth here
but peace. The little gold they have is
not for buying but for beauty. Kindness,
charity and contentment under God is
their aim. No man here is rich or poor,
powerful or slave, but all are brothers
sharing equally. There are no factions
or quarrels, no hate, no wars. It is
indeed the Land of the Blest."
He went on to tell Senor Gil that these
people, like the Indian-Irish, had also
been transported overseas by their conquerors,
whether Elizabethan or Cromwellian it was hard to say. But they did
not intermarry with the natives, but kept
themselves aloof, being the members of
several kindred families of distinguished
blood. They, too, had escaped to the
mountains, but they had continued on,
looking for a secure land, where the
others had stopped.
They had, it seemed, a plan. They
were led by a strong chief and a great
bard-lawgiver. This bard had persuaded
them to emulate St. Brendan and seek a
land " secret, hidden, secure, delightful
and apart from men." He was always
repeating to them the vision of such a
country as the saint had described it :
"A land of odorous flowers, smooth,
bland, of many melodied, musical,
shouts of joy, unmournful," where
there was "health without sickness,
delight without quarrelling, union without
wrangling, princedom without dissolution,
rest without idleness, freedom
without labour, luminous unity of
angels, ... and all things else whatsoever
that could appease the heart
of man ....
In time they had found this valley,
and from the first had striven to create a
community life that corresponded to St.
Brendan's ideal. It had not been easy.
But they were strong in their Faith, had
a strong king, and had, above all, the
wise guidance of the bard, who had
founded a line of poet-lawgivers as
strongly-wise as himself. So the community
had with one heart set itself this
goal of peace and brotherliness. The
earthquake had helped. Since it shut
them in, cutting off the distractions of the
world, it had forced them to create and
maintain this perfect community life in
order to endure. So it was now, except
for one thing. The line of the bard had
died out a few years before, and, clinging
to tradition as these people did, they
had feared that their resolution might
weaken without bardic inspiration.
" Had ? " said Senor Gil. " You mean
that fear is past now ? "
'' They think so, I hope so,'' said Canal
Kevin Huiginn. " The name of the
bards was O'Huiginn. . . . I, too, am
of that family and line. I, too, am a .
bard, and I have, by the grace of heaven,.
found them."

That, then, was the real object of this.
strange journey, not search for a land of
wealth, but for a land of peace . Canal
Huiginn left Senor Gil and went down
to his Land of Promise. That night the
guards blindfolded Senor Gil and led
him out to the pass, where he found the
mules and baggage not only untouched
but cared for. And so he came back to
the coast alone.
" But," I cried, " did this Conal never
explain ? How, for instance, did he
know there was such a place ? Was there
any tradition among his people-had
word of it been handed down among
Irish bards ? Or was there, for all their
secrecy, some means by which those
people in the valley could communicate
with those bards in Ireland ? Or
what?...”
" I do not know," shrugged Senor
Gil. " I asked him these and many such
questions. He did not answer. Only
when I cried in desperation, like you-,
or what,' he said ' Call it a dream
come true .... .' And he smiled at
me with those seer's eyes of his .....
And looking into those eyes, well, one
felt that even an ability to see things
not given to ordinary men might be the
reason ...
"No, I do not know. To this day I
do not know what led him to this strange
destiny. There are even times when it
seems to me but a wild dream of my own
-but for this --" He felt under his
shirt and produced a washleather pouch-
'' Before he left me he gave me some
pieces of gold, which, alas, were too soon
spent, also this, which I have not parted
with, though it is also of gold ."
He laid on the table a tiny statuette of
an old bearded man playing a small
eight stringed harp : obviously an Irish
harp, just as the statuette was obviously
Celtic. With it went a scrap of much
thumbed paper bearing the words in
Spanish:
"To Senor Gil Lerida this memento of
my ancestor, Maol Turlough O'Huiginn,
from Conal Kevin Huiginn, who followed
in his footsteps and succeeded to his
heritage."
