Like ancient Gaul, Kerry is divided
into three distinct parts. To the
north lies the plain between
Shannon and Maine, which is so rich that
successive waves of invaders kept it in
perpetual turmoil, fighting for possession.
To the west a long, narrow peninsula
sticks out like a fingerpost towards the
Americas which have drained it dry in
emigration. A great convention of
mountains fills the south, once so poor,
when grass was gold, and now so rich,
when natural beauty rates higher than
grass or gold. Taken together the three
parts make up a distinguished whole,
which its own people love and the wide
world admires.
" Kerry " began as a clan name rather
than a place name. The Ciarraidhe were
a sept who traced their origins to a Mayo
man, whose hair was so black and curly
that his fond mammy, the indomitable
Meadbh, called him Ciar. At first they
occupied only the level lowlands along
the Shannon estuary, but they multiplied
and swarmed southwards into separate
communities. Those colonies gave their
names to their new locations; beautiful
names in the original Irish, but terrible
to both tongue and eye in their alien
English dress.
Look at them side by side and sigh:
Oighreacht Ui
Chonchubhair Irraghticonnor
Triuch an Aicme Trughanackmy
Corea Dhuibhne Corkaguiney
Magh gConchinne Magonihy
Uibh Rathach Iveragh
Dun Cearn Dunkerron
Tuath O Siosta Glanaroughty
The Irish names have meaning for us.
Listen to them. " O'Connor's Heritage,"
"The Cantred of The Tribe," "Dovinia's
Offspring," "Roundhead's Plain," "The
Children of Rathach," "Cearn's Fortress"
and '' The Land of the Children of
Siosta."
How hard old memories die. Though
Roundhead (Con Ceann) checked out
two thousand years ago, his headstone
still stands on a hillock a bare two miles
from where I sit, recalling his name from
the obscure past. Safe at last from the
roadmender's hammer, it looks out over
the plain which bears his name, showing
that name cut deep in its windworn
arrises. Dane, Norman and Sasanach
have, in turn, over-run the plain, enjoyed
it for a while and at last handed it back
to us, Roundhead's children's children.
Let us have a good look at these Kerrymen
and, incidentally, at the beautiful
county they live in. They have always
been a problem to their neighbours, who
find them hard to beat in work or play.
For many a long day they have been
labelled Na Ciarraidhaigh Malluithe,
Those Dam Kerrymen. But the Dam
Kerrymen laugh, as cats laugh at the
mice who try to bell them. They can
afford to laugh, for they enjoy another
and more valued reputation. Their
guests, be they tourists or tinkers, have
nothing but praise for Kerry hospitality.
They are loth to leave and eager to return.
Count them on the roads.
They have a reputation for Latinity,
too. Virgil started it when he declared
" Conticuere omnes : We're all from the
County Kerry," and Rinuccini confirmed
it in his report that all he met at Kenmare
could talk Latin. Alas ! to offset the
august Romans came Mike Mara of
Mullagh, who sent Paddy to college to
make him one of the three p's, so dear
to the Kerryrrman's heart, a priest, if he
had the vocation, a pedagogue or a
peeler, if he hadn't.
Paddy was at home on his holidays,
idly watching his father filling dung into
a cart. The old man learned on his pike
and eyed his idle boy.
"Would you tell me, a weenagh, what's
the Latin for horse ? "
" Horsibus, sir."
"And the Latin for cart ?"
" Cartibus, o' course."
"And dung is dungibus, I suppose ?"
"Yes, sir.”
"Listen here to me, Patsheen. If you
don't ketch that pikibus and fill that
dungibus into that cartibus, I'll break
every bone in your bodybus."
But, then, there is the story of The
Star of Kerry and Rowan Hamilton.
The Star was a hedge schoolmaster, who
taught at Beaufort, to the west of
Killarney, and had a great name for
mathematics among his brethren. They
met in the middle of Beaufort bridge,
near which Hamilton was staying on a
holiday, gave each other "good day"
and fell into talk. The talk ran inevitably
to their pet subject and to the
famous problem which teased the hedge
schools of the day-the quadrature of
the circle. They got no solution, of
course, but they became great friends
and Hamilton sent the Star an autographed
copy of his treatise on quaternions,
as from one scholar to another.
But to return to our Kerrymen. They
are a mixed lot. But so are all Irishmen
and, for that matter, all races which
have ceased the nomadic wandering that
kept them pure. It took three breeds
to make the Irishman : Gaels, Firbolgs
and Sasanachs. The scholars call them
Q-Celts, P-Celts and Teutons, bulking
Danes, Normans and Saxons together
as Teutons. For historic reasons, the
Kerryman has more P-Celt blood in him
and less Teuton than his midland brother.
You see, the Firbolgs fled for their last
stand against the conquering Gael to the
fastnesses of Kerry and Donegal, and
there were a lot of them to be absorbed
into the common stock. Those same
mountain fastnesses offered poor returns
to the invading Sasanach and he left
them to the natives to live in. So that
the Kerryman has a strong dash of
P-Celt blood in him and only a trace of
Teuton, and that is what makes him
different.
Don't believe the old tales which say
that the Firbolg was a small, hardy,
black-haired runt, with sharp face and
shifty eyes. The scribes who wrote
the tales were Gaels reviling the race
they had conquered but couldn't keep
down. The English did the same to us.
No. He was an able and resourceful
fellow. It took more ingenuity than
brute strength to build the cyclopean
fortresses at Aileach, Dun Aengus and
Staigue, which surpass anything the
Gael left behind from the past. You
can see the same resource and ingenuity
being shown by his descendants in the
Kerry hills today in the endless struggle
to tame an intractable heritage.
Howard Harrington had the old bee
in his bonnet about the Firbolgs, and a
great pride in the Gael. Howard actually
bought out Dunloe Castle with the intention
of founding a Neo-Gaelic county
family and making the castle a focal
point for Gaelic reunions.
"Those darn P-Celts are the bane of
our life,'' he used say. "They are our
Wops ; a mean, unreliable lot who can't
carry their drink like gentlemen. Argh !
they're the limit."
But his neighbour, Con the Thatcher,
poopoo-ed his attack on the Firbolgs.
Con was a Moriarty, a descendant of the
Clann Mhuircheartaigh who owned Loch
Lein and the surrounding country in
the heyday of the Gael. He was a born
shanachie and his was the last word in
any dispute on local history.
"Nonsense, man," he retorted, when
the diatribe against the Firbolgs was
reported to him. " Sure, the world
knows they were giants and darling
fighters. It took the Milesians all their
time to best them. What was Fionn
Mac Cool but a Firbolg? What were
Oscar and Oisin and Goll Mac Morna but
Firbolgs ? Look out that window there
at the gallaun and tell me the weight
of it. Twenty ton, if it's an ounce.
Well, let me tell you and Mister Know-all
Harrington that that gallaun was the
fingerstone Oscar threw at Sceolaun, the
hound, for losing the scent of the wild
boar they were hunting. It missed the
dog, but it stuck in the ground to give
the lie to any Johnny-come-lately that
says Oscar was a '' small dark man.''
"What's more," he went on, "the
Firbolgs were great poets in their day.
Did Harrington ever hear The Lay of
Oisin in The Land of the Young? Come
out to the door and I'll show you the
very spot where Oisin met Niamh of
the Golden Hair." He pointed across
the water of the lake to the Fossa shore.
"See that break in the sand, where the
Min Uisge flows into the lake. That's
where they met. Seeing is believing.
Pity ye have no Irish or I'd give ye the
whole of the lay Oisin composed when he
came back, an old withered man. But
here's the start of it." He threw out his
chest and declaimed aloud :
"Ag seilg dúinne, maidin ceo' ach,
Ar imeal-bhordaibh Locha Léin,
Mar a raibh crainn ba mhilse bláth
Is ceol gach tráth go binn ag éin."
"Ah ! 'tis a fine poem and Oisin was
a darling man; so he was. The highest
feather in our hat and he a Firbolg, too."
North Kerry
I was reminded of Con the Thatcher's
belief in the strong dash of P-Celt blood
in our veins when I came to trace the
original tribe of Ciarraidhe back to their
beginnings. By common assent they are
the children of Ciar and Ciar was a Mayo
man. A hunt through the entrancing,
tales of The Red Branch Heroes led to
Meadhbh and Fearghus Mac Roigh, a quo
Ciar, and to the fact that Fearghus was
no pure Gael. Like his friends, Cuchulainn
and Scathach, he was a P-Celt.
The Ciarraidhe spread over the rich
land that lies between the Shannon and
the Maine. They held it free of tribute
in spite of the Kings of Cashel, who tried
to exact it. It was the wily old Diarmuid
Mac Carthy of Cashel who first sent the
Normans into Ciarraidhe. His son,
Cormac, had gone into rebellion against
him because he had bent his knee ton
easily to the invaders and Diarmuid
planned to kill two birds at one shot.
He called in Raymond Le Gros to discipline
his naughty boy and offered, in
reward, his non-effective rights to the
Ciarraidhe territory. Of course, he did
not tell the big-bellied Norman that he
had never succeeded in levying as much
as a mangy calf on the men of Kerry.
Raymond didn't mind. He surprised
Cormac at Mourne Abbey, cut off his
head and sent it, wrapped up in a Mac
Carthy fallaing, to Diarmuid. Then
he wheeled westwards to take up his
payment in Kerry. Like all fat men he
was quick on his feet.
The O'Connors gave him a hot reception.
They fought him to a standstill,
during which they came to terms. They
ceded to Raymond and his successors,
the Fitzmaurices, the half of Ciarraidhe
which lies between the Feale and the
Maine and retained for themselves the
lands between the Feale and the Shannon.
In due course the Fitzmaurices got
absorbed into Gaeldom and their country
came to be known by their family name,
Clann Muiris. The O'Connors renamed
their narrowed patrimony Oighreacht Ui
Chonchubhair. That treaty lasted for four
hundred years until the Elizabethans
came and wrested the lands from both
Celt and Norman, wiping out all trace of
their former greatness, except their
names. Those they crystallized in the
names of the baronies by which they
designated the confiscated lands, Clanmaurice
and Irraghticonnor.
Though Clanmaurice and Irraghticonnor
are rich in beef and butter, they
are poor, by comparison with the rest
of Kerry, in natural beauty. They have
nothing to show the tourist, but the view
from the top of Knock an Oir, their only
eminence, and the sea-caves of Ballybunion.
Nor have they as many ancient
buildings, pagan or early Christian, to
show the archaeologist.
True, the Fitzmaurices, conforming
to the settled Norman practice, erected
formidable castles to consolidate their
conquest, and then proceeded to build
the magnificent cathedral of Kyrie
Eleison at Ardfert, to propitiate the
Lord. Not to be outdone, the O'Connors 
immured themselves in gloomy castles,
which were totally alien to their open-air
way of life. Their famous fortress at
Carrigafoyle is well worth a visit, for its
unnecessarily stupendous size, its indefensible
position on a tidal rock in the
Shannon slob and for the silent comment
it makes on the futility of all the castles
built by the Gael all over Ireland. They
were built after the invention of gun
powder had made them obsolete. In the
event, the O'Connors surrendered Carrigafoyle
to the first salvo of round shot
from Sir Charles Wilmot's culverins.
North Kerry has a fine literary tradition, both in English and Irish. It will
come as a surprise to the present generation of Irish students, who have been fed 
on the stock anthologies of Gaelic verse
and prose favoured by school programmes,
to hear that a bardic school
arose and flourished at Lisselton during
the Jacobite resurgence and that it produced
some fine poets and a host of excellent
scribes. The best of their work
perished with the manuscripts which were
thrown on the fire or dumped on the
manure-heap in the black-out that
followed the Famine of '47. But enough
remains in national collections to show
that Lisselton was a worthy contemporary
of Rathluirc, and that its bards did not
confine themselves to Irish. English
and Latin verse flowed equally free from
their goose-quill pens. 
It is not surprising that the O'Connors
cut a fine figure in the school at Lisselton.
After all, Lisselton is in Oighreacht Ui
Chonchubhair and the law of averages
works there as elsewhere. The O'Connors
predominated then as now. It was a
proud day for me when I held my first
inspection in the junior section of Tarbert
national school in 1931. The manager,
who was present, drew attention to the
fact that he was an O'Connor, the inspector
was an O'Connor, the teacher
was an O'Connor, and twenty of the
twenty-eight children at school that day
were O'Connors. And Tarbert is only a
dozen crow miles from Lisselton.
But to get back to Lisselton and the
eighteenth century. Murrough O'Connor
wrote his eclogue ' The Kerry Pastorale '
in 1715 and succeeded in getting it published
in Dublin in 1719. His more
versatile cousin, Diarmuid, was by
common assent the most famous scribe
of his day and that verdict includes his
successor, Micheal O Longain himself,
who learned his art at Lisselton. But
Diarmuid was an engraver and designer
as well as a scholar and went to London
where he could turn his talents to account.
It was there he published his edition of
Foras Feasa Eireann with the English
translation, which first exposed Keating
Fossa na féile
'' Dinny''
Sacred Heart Statue, Ardfert (Finneran)
Tragic memory. Ballykissane Pier (near Killorglin)
View from Aghadoe
Matriarch
Coming from Puck
Friends
Reflections
Kerry Rock
Lowering Skies
The Franciscan Church, Killarney
Street scene
Ciarraighe álainn
The Gap of Dunloe
to the jibes of the critical for being
uncritical.
But the scribes of Lisselton hadn't the
world all to themselves. Across the
Feale, in Clanmaurice, the school of
harpers founded by Blind Nick Pierse of
Bishop's Court was still in full session.
He was the Nioclás Dall to whom Pierce
Ferriter referred in his poem, thanking
Meig Ní Chonchubhair for the beautiful
harp she sent him in 1640.
"M'ionmhaine, mo thréan tobhaigh,
Meig óg Inghean Chonchubhair.
M'annsa clí, séad-rang a sreath,
‘Si do chéad-bhronn an chláirseach.
Dial na neamhgha Nioclás Dall
A dhíol-sa an chruit gan chonchlann.''
The fame of the Clanmaurice harpers
spread as far north as Ulster and drew
On them a succession of challengers from
northern schools. Eoin MacEoin of
Clandeboye spent a month in friendly
rivalry with the Clanmaurice men in
1700 and admitted on his return that the
Kerrymen had condemned his Ulster
style of playing the harp as 'old fashioned
and lacking in trills.' Fifty years later,
Art O'Neill toured all Ireland, from
School to school, to show his own great
skill on the harp. He admitted, when he
got back to the north, that Carolan of
Mohill and Cornelius Lyons of Clanmaurice
were the greatest two harpers
of the day, for besides being supreme
practitioners on their instruments, they
could also compose music worthy of their
own great skill.
O'Neill tells of the banquet Lord
Kenmare gave to the gentlemen of Kerry
-in his mansion of Prospect Hall, to
which O'Neill was invited to play the
harp. "When I was done," he says,
"the young gentleman who represented
O'Connor Kerry took my harp and
played tunes in a first-class style, such as
I had never heard before from a gentleman
of quality.''
That was in the summer of 1750. When
the Stuarts were broken in the Forty-five,
the bards and harpers lingered on
without a cause into the next century.
Micheal O Longain was writing assiduously
at Lisselton in 1808 and there is a
memory of a great hosting of harpers at
Ratoo in the June of Waterloo. Then
came the Famine and silence.
But not for long. Tom Moore's father
was reared at Lixnaw, halfway between
Lisselton and Bishop's Court, when the
schools were in their heyday and must
have imbibed the national spirit which
they exhaled. He imparted that spirit to
his son and, with it, the respect for poetry
and minstrelsy he had acquired in Clanmaurice.
Indeed, Moore has always been
considered by Kerrymen, to be a direct
offshoot from the Lisselton school. Austin
Stack's father went so far as to assume
the name Moore-Stack, to certify his
relationship to the poet.
We claim Gerald Griffin, too. Though
born just across the Limerick border he
belongs by breeding and upbringing to
North Kerry. My maternal grandmother
knew Gerald as a cousin and
remembered his visits to her home at
Caherdown, near Listowel, when his
health began to break. She was proud
of his poems, but she never forgave him
for ' The Colleen Bawn.' "He had no
right to make a show of the Scanlans the
way he did," she used say in loyalty to
the ceithearnach class to which she and
the Scanlans belonged. " The Scanlans
were decent people, but for the one boy that
went wrong.'' But neither she nor I
knew at that time that Gerald Griffin's
'Colleen Bawn' was the very first of
the thronging procession of thrillers that
have since poured out of the printing
presses of the world. Americans claimed
that Edgar Allan Poe's ' The Murders in
the Rue Morgue ' was the original ' Who
Dun It,' until they found out that ' The
Colleen Bawn' beat it by twelve years.
The literary tradition lives on in a
strong band of contemporary writers.
Maurice Walsh, Bryan MacMahon and
Seamus Wilmot are well known on both
sides of the Atlantic and are grouped
together as The Listowel School.
Maurice's ' Small Dark Man ' and ' The
Key Above the Door' have a flavour all
their own: Bryan's 'Lion Tamer' was
voted one of the best ten achievements
in creative writing published in the United
States in 1949 and Seamus is on the high
road to join him.
Trughanackmy
I have often wondered who were the
tribe, the aicme, who gave their name to
this midway barony, and what was a
triocha. I never learned anything of the
lost tribe, but I did discover Roderick
O'Flaherty's account of the 'triocha
cead.' He said it contained thirty
(triocha) bailes of 480 acres each, so that
the average triocha works out at about
fourteen thousand acres.
This one of Trughanackmy runs across
the waist of the county from Slieve Mish
to Mount Eagle, through an uninteresting
tract of rough hill and fertile plain.
Tralee lies at its western end and Castleisland
to the east, and, of course, the
Normans had a strategic castle in each
of them. The castles have followed their
builders into oblivion, but the ancillary
towns remain.
Tralee, the commercial capital of the
county, was slow to take a prominent
part in County history, but it made up
for lost opportunities in recent times.
It began as an adjunct to the Geraldine
castle guarding the western approaches
to Desmond. The Dennys made it the
juridical centre for themselves, the
Herberts of Castleisland and the Brownes
of Molahiffe, who divided Desmond between
them.
By the time the Cromwellians took
over, it was a well established assize town
of the English pattern, with its appurtenant
courthouse, gaol, stocks and
gallows. They set up Grand Juries to
arraign the papist enemy, and built
barracks to have soldiery at call to repress
them. When they had the country
well and truly tamed, they used those
barracks to enlist soldiers for export in
the drive for empire. Folk ballads, which
are still sung, recall those hopeless days,
when the army was the only outlet for
landless young men.
" In Dinny street in sweet Tralee,
One day in the month of August,
Who should I meet coming down the street
But a bould recruiting sergeant ? "
But the men of Tralee were never
tamed. They only bided their time. In
the struggle for independence they jumped
to action and turned their fine town into.
a death trap for the British garrison.
They gave them no rest until the cease
fire was sounded and the last battalion of
alien soldiers had marched out for ever.
Hidden in the foothills between Tralee and
Castleisland is the gloomy little glen
in which the last Earl of Desmond met
his miserable end in 1583. Two of his
own people, a Moriarty and a Kelly,
stole upon him in the dark and cut off his
head for the thousand pounds Walsingham
had put on it. It is gratifying to
know that the Governor of Castlemaine,
after he had duly identified the gory
trophy and sent it to Walsingham to
stick on a spike on the Tower, kicked
the two rascals out the postern gate and
put the reward into his own pocket.
The memory of that ancient tragedy makes
lonely Glenageenty seem lonelier still.
Slieve Mish stands at the western
boundary of Trughanackmy, a silent
monument to the Gaels and Firbolgs,
who fought the first of their bloody
battles for mastery on its slopes, if tradition
is good history. To support the
tradition, Queen Scotia, who was killed
in the thick of the fight, lies buried in
Glounscoheen, if Scoheen means Scotia.
It is strange that in the extreme north-eastern
corner of Eire, stands another
Slieve Mish of greater fame. On ours,
two pagan cults fought for supremacy;
on the other, a young slave laid his plans
to bring us the true Faith, which banished,
once and for all, the druidical cults of
both Gael and Firbolg.
Trughanackmy cuts a rather small
figure in literature. I can remember only
one Gaelic poet, whose songs were sung
down to my time, and his fame was
confined to the hills between Castleisland
and Abbeyfeale. Uilig O Ceirin's
ballads were tuneful comments on the
topics of his day, composed while he was
weaving wool into bandles of frieze for
his neighbours. His ' Farewell to Poetry.'
written after a carouse in Ballyhahill,
survived longer than any other of the
hundreds he composed.
" Seo mo shlán-sa le ceapadh dánta
Indiu, go brá'ach, go n-eagfad.
Mar is minic do fágadh, i dtig a' tábhairne,
Im amadán gan cheill mi."
The roster of writers in English is
almost as slight. There was a great
vogue, in the middle of the last century,
among the leisured, I almost said idle,
old 'maids and parsons of Tralee, for
archaeology and family history. Archdeacon
Rowan of Tralee published Lake
Lore in 1853, after he had testified
strongly at the Kildare St. Commission
against building National Schools for
Catholics. Miss Hickson wrote voluminous
articles on Kerry history, garnered
from State papers and Protestant family
records, which are a tribute to her extraordinary
industry and a revelation of
her ingenuous, uncritical attitude of
mind. Father Denis O'Donoghue, parish
priest of Ardfert, caught the infection
and wrote up Kerry history from the
Catholic point of view. He will be remembered
best for his Brendaniana
(1893), which gives a full account of
' St. Brendan, the Voyager, in Story and
Legend.'
Alice Curtayne, who was born in
Tralee, stands alone on an eminent
pedestal. Her masterpiece, Catherine of
Siena, is distinguished by a clarity of
expression and a soundness of judgment
not usually attributed to women writers,
even in the religious field in which she
prefers to work.
I wonder has anyone in Kerry a copy
of a novel by John McEnry, a Tralee
journalist? He wrote it about fifty years
ago in the manner of Max Pemberton,
the best seller of that peaceful time.
I read it and remember that the scene
was set in Tzarist Russia, but cannot
recall the title, nearer than A Vision
of Foam.

West Kerry
Corkaguiney is a treasure house of the
pagan past. Every hill, valley, headland
and towering peak in the long narrow
peninsula bears relics of the ancient race,
which was driven from the central plains
to this last retreat before it was completely
submerged. The rugged, thirtymile
spine, stretching out into the
Atlantic, has a few fringes of level land
along the inland waters of Tralee and
Castlemaine bays. Elsewhere it presents
an unbroken front of frowning cliffs to
the encircling sea.
The Normans, who knew bad land
when they saw it, left it more or less
alone and built none of their major
castles or spacious monasteries to defend
or glorify it. They thought a blockhouse,
here and there, was sufficient. There are,
accordingly, no ruined abbeys or shattered
fortresses of importance in the
whole barony. But their predecessors,
especially the P-Celts, left a plenitude
of drystone buildings and memorial
stones to show how industrious a people
they were. The architecture of Corkaguiney,
which began before history was
written, ends with the downfall of the
Gael, but what the re is of it, after centuries
of ocean gales, makes this remote
peninsula of the west as significant for
archaeology as Crete or the Nile Valley.
Its name is Gaelic, Corca Dhuibhne,
the Offspring of Dovinia, owned it long
enough to give it their name and the name
stuck. Dovinia was a lady of royal
stock. Indeed, her grandfather, Conaire,
was High King of Ireland about the time
St. Paul was converting the Mediterranean
Gentiles. Her offspring must
have been proud of her, for many of their
ogham epitaphs record their descent
from her illustrious self. I wonder did
she know Roundhead of Dunloe. He
must have lived in her day.
The west end of the peninsula is strewn
with Brendaniana. It has a well called
Tobar Breanainn, and a range of ruined
dwellings at Kilmakedar called Fothrach
Bréanainn, in which he lived. Overtopping
all is Mount Brandon, on which
he spent forty days preparing for the
voyage to America, which made him
more famous in medieval Europe than
Marco Polo himself. It was he who
founded the original Celtic church at
Kilmakecar, which the Danes destroyed
and the good friars of Ardfert rebuilt
in the Norman style. He must have
had a hand in building the beautiful,
little stone-roofed Oratory of Gallerus,
which stands alone on the lower slope
of the hill. If he hadn't, he surely said
many a prayer beneath its shapely roof.
Two fine harbours run into the Brendan
country, Smerwick from the north, and
Ventry from the south, and both have
tragic stories of ' battles long ago.' A
bluff sticks out into Smerwick harbour
and on its seaward end lie traces of Dun
an Oir. It was there that Lord Grey,
lord justice of Ireland under Elizabeth,
perpetrated an act of savagery which
appalled Europe, even in those days of
summary executions. He turned his
soldiers loose upon the garrison of Spanish
and Italian auxiliaries who had come to
assist in the Desmond rebellion, and had
surrendered to a heavy bombardment
from land and sea. Here are his own
words to the British Queen.
"Hanged all the Irish men and women
and upwards of 400 Italians, Spaniards
and Basques put to the sword . Executed
Doctor Sanders and two others, whose
arms and legs were broken for torture.''
The Battle of Ventry Harbour was a
much more civilised affair, although it
happened a thousand years earlier.
Hoary tradition and venerable script
record that Daire Donn, the puissant
emperor of the world, sailed into the harbour,
in a fleet that filled its ample waters.
He came to take possession of the pleasant
land of Eire, the only land in the wide,
wide world which lay outside his
dominions. Fionn Mac Cool and seven
battalions of the Fianna Eireann rushed
across country to oppose him on the
white sands that give the harbour its
name.
"Ar thráigh Fhinntrágha an chuain,
Mar ar chuir na sloigh an t-ár
Ar rioghra an domhain tréin
D' ól sinn ár saith.''
The battle, which lasted a year and a
day, was "played" according to the
punctilious code of the time. Every
morning Daire Donn sent a picked
champion ashore to fight Fionn's selection
for the day, in full view of the fleet
and the massed battalions on the sands.
Day by day it went on, until the young
King of France came in to fight Oscar,
the mightiest hero of all the Fianna.
The shore shook under Oscar's feet as he
stamped to meet his man, so that the
waves of the harbour well-nigh swamped
the ships. Sheer terror drove the King
of France stark, staring mad. He fled
the field and did not stop or stay in his
mad career, till he reached the secluded
glen, which looks out over Min na Scairte
to the Sea of Foirdreamhain and beyond.
There he bathed his brow in the cool
water of a bubbling well and there he
is ever since, waiting for news of the
battle and attracting to himself all those
who become afflicted with madness such
as his. Their asylum is Gleann na
nGealt, the Glen of the Mad.
And now another tale of Corkaguiney,
older and more romantic than the Battle
of Ventry Harbour. It began in the Isle
of Man and ended on Caherconree, the
mountain which looms over Gleann na
nGealt, and takes its name from the chief
actor in the ancient tragedy. A synopsis
of the drama will kill all its dynamic
power. Still, here goes.
Curoi was lord of Corkaguiney in his
day and a great sea rover. In one of
his raids he ravaged the Isle of Man,
captured the Princess Blanait and bore
her home to his eyrie, high up on the
hill. But Cuculainn was at his heels,
wanting the lady for himself and, of
course, spoiling for a fight. He assaulted
the fortress in the clouds in vain, for the
fort was strong and Curoi a doughty
warrior. So he had to lay siege to it, and
sieges are tedious things. Blanait grew
tired of the seclusion and of Curoi, and
planned to betray him to his enemy.
Inducing Curoi to send his men on a
fool's chase, she made him drunk and
signalled the state of affairs down to
Cuculainn by spilling milk into the
mountain stream close by. The Ulster
man climbed into the empty fort, killed
the unconscious chief and took the
Pictish Delilah off on his shoulder. But
death followed her to the north where
Feircheirtne, the bard of Curoi, overtook
her and jumped, with her in his arms,
over a cliff into the sea.
Dingle is, of course, the hub of Corkaguiney.
We overshot it in our mad rush
with the King of France from Ventry to
Glenagalt and must get back to it. Not
to trace its history. That would make
us dizzy, it changed owners so often
since Dovinia ruled the roost. The
Trants took over from her Falveys, the
Dennys from the Trants, the Mullinses
from the Dennys and now the Dovinians
are in possession again. As there is
nothing so permanent in life as change,
we may well wonder who will take over
from them.
The town snuggles down comfortably
between Knockacarn hill and the safest
little harbour in the west. I spent my
boyhood in the exciting odours of salt
water, sailcloth and pickled fish that
made the haven a heaven for my generation.
It is a pity the port has no hinterland
to keep it busy. Still, the superb
beauty of its surroundings will always
draw into Dingle those who love panoramic
seascapes, prehistoric relics in
abundance and a people who speak
Gaelic in all its ancient vigour.
Two picturesque motor tours start
from Dingle. One runs to the west
around Slea Head, through the Brendan
country and back; the other strikes
north-eastwards over Connor Hill through
Castlegregory and back by Aunascaul.
Go and see for yourself. A description in
print would be an impertinence. But
when you stand at Slea Head and gaze
out at the lonely, seabound Blaskets,
ask yourself what miracle of the human
mind enabled three unspoiled natives
of those islands to write, in the only
language they knew, three separate
masterpieces of homely autobiography.
Tomás O Criomhthan's Oileánach,
Muirish O Sullivan's Fiche Bliain ag
Fás and Peg Sears's Peig are worthy
of a place in any library.
Then look to your right towards Ballyferriter
and breathe a prayer for Piaras
Ferriter, as gallant a soldier-poet as Sir
Philip Sidney ; Piaras, who died in a
cause loftier than Philip's, at home and
not carrying war into the Netherlands.
Now turn and look back, over the road
you have traversed, to Ballingoilin,
where The Seabhac wrote 'Jimín Mháire
Thaidhg,' the first and the best,
humorous story written in modern
Irish. And then, before you move on,
tip your cap and say " These people are
worthy of the land they live in."
South Kerry
South Kerry is the Kerry Switzerland,
a country of alps and lakes and welcoming
people. Switzerland has, to be sure, a
snowy skyline, but Kerry has a showy
coast line to even things up, and an
accessibility to motorists, which the
Swiss alps have not. Motorcars can make
their way on excellent roads around the
assembled mountains or penetrate into
the innermost glens. Around every
corner is a new vista of open sea, rockbound
lake and towering cliff, sometimes
wrapped in mist which softens austere
outlines and sets free the imagination,
but more often displays in the brilliant
blues and whites and greens that are seen
only in humid air.
One would imagine that this paradise
on earth was peopled down the ages by
cherubs and seraphim. External beauty
must have had its beatific influence and
made angels of its inhabitants. Far
from it. Its history is an unending
record of plunder and rapine. O'Sheas,
O'Mahonys, O'Sullivans and MacCarthys,
in turn, bit the dust and went down in
their own tribal wars, before the Saxon
came to wipe them all out. These
systematic warriors ignored the old tribal
territories and divided the maze of
mountains into ridings to suit their
English laws, but retained the old Gaelic
place names to fix their locations. That
is how we got the two baronies of Iveragh
and Dunkerron. When Dunkerron
proved too awkward for administration
they divided it in two, but retained the
name to suit their records.
It is a far cry from Concheann, Rathach
and Cearn to us. Much water has gone
under bridges since they roamed the hills
of South Kerry. Most of it was turbulent
water discoloured by blood as often as
by the debris of the hills. But the water
has gone out into the purifying sea and
the generations of blood spillers into the
ocean of God's Goodness. All are forgotten
of men except the original three,
Concheann, Rathach and Cearn, whose
memory is preserved in the names of the
territories they conquered from the wild,
Magonihy, Iveragh and Dunkerron.
Magonihy
Magonihy is not even a name to the
millions who sing about Killarney's lakes
and fells. To the natives it is no more
than a word which obtrudes in deeds of
assignment, on one of which I have seen
it spelled ' Mahogany.' Poor old Concheann
! Poor old Roundhead ! Your
only remembrancer is that mute ogham
stone on the hill at Dunloe.
There are really two distinct parts in
Concheann's plain, each famous in its own
right. The lake district, known the
world over as Heaven's Reflex, lies to the
southwest. The poets' country, known
only to lovers of Gaelic literature,
stretches to the east into the otherwise
undistinguished moors of Slieve Luachra.
Together they make Magonihy the most
interesting barony in Ireland.
Its literary history began with The
Annals of Inisfallen, compiled over
many years on the loveliest island in the
lakes. Thereafter, the spirit of poetry
fled from her natural habitat of peace
and heavenly beauty. Once the peace
was broken the beauty was gone. She
took refuge in the heathery hills of Slieve
Luachra to which her people had fled.
There she revived and flourished abundantly,
though her songs were mournful
and her courage low.
In his ancestral castle at Killaha,
Geoffrey O'Donoghue scourged, in
scholarly verse, the roundheads, who
were usurping his wide domain. Aodhagan
O Rathaile went about among the fallen
Gaelic gentry, extolling their glorious
past and bidding them hope in the
morrow. Hear him sing :
Inis fé réim i gcéin san iarthar tá.
An island of fame away to the west I
saw.
Eoghan Ruadh O'Sullivan, a poet of
the people as racy and convivial as his
contemporary, Bobby Burns, sang
Jacobite songs with a gusto that cheered
a broken people through its darkest
years. There were others, but those
three were the flower of the flock, the
minstrels, who raised their voices in the
great Gaelic swan-song, which still lingers
in the Irish ear.
The eclipse of the native language put
an end to poetry in Magonihy. No Gael
took kindly to English and the Anglo-Irish
were too busy peddling in real
estate to bother with scribbling. Killarney
had only an incidental connection
with writers of repute. Raspe, who
wrote the Adventures of Baron Munchausen,
worked the copper mines for
Herbert of Muckross, where he died. He
is buried in Killarney. Years later
Ouida wrote Under Two Flags, while she
was governess to the Herberts of Cahernane.
But Magonihy lays no claim to
either Raspe or Ouida. They were birds
of passage. It might consider Kathleen
Herbert of Cahernane, who, in her
eightieth year and after an adventurous
life abroad, broke the long Anglo-Irish
silence with Bricks and Flowers. An
excellent autobiography in which she
flings no bricks and presents no bouquets,
but reveals her racial prejudices against
the indigenous Irish in the early chapters
on her youth in Killarney.
An antiquary could have a happy time
among the relics of Magonihy's pagan
past. There is the cluster of ogham
stones at Dunloe; the druid circle at
Lissivigeen, telling a dummy's tale with
pointing stone fingers ; mysterious Dun
Dag on the middle lake and souterrains
all over the place. Of Christian ruins
there are the Celtic cathedral on the hill
at Aghadoe and the great Celtic
monastery in the lake at Inisfallen. The
only ecclesiastical ruin of medieval days
is the Franciscan convent at Oirbhealach
on the Muckross shore. But what a
beauty it is, as serene in its retirement
from a troubled world as the quiet, untroubled
dead, who sleep in its sheltering
shadow.
The barony is studded with crumbling
castles, most of them built by the Irish.
The O'Donoghues built two, one at Ross
to watch the lakes and the other at
Killaha to guard the pass through Glenflesk.
O'Sullivan Mór fortified Dunloe
to command the ford on the Laune and
his liege lord, the MacCarthy Mór, erected
his princely fortress on the slope of Pallas,
where he could keep an eye on all the
approaches to his wide domain. The
pity of it is that all, except one, surrendered
without a shot. Ross stood
siege against Ludlow, until his barges
came across the lake and pointed their
cannon at its rear. Then it, too, surrendered.
But why proceed further on the
vestiges of ancient Magonihy ? Killarney
is Magonihy to all intents and purposes,
and the 'uitlander' has made it his own.
Con the Thatcher calls it Baile na
gCoigcrioch. Robert Gibbings says in
"Over the Reef" that he heard a Fiji
fisherman singing ' Killarney ' off an
atoll in the South Pacific. Like Jerusalem,
it has been internationalised.
Iveragh
The Children of Rathach chose a rough
jumble of mountains to live in. But that
was just the sort of hide-out they needed
to escape from their aggressive Q-cousins.
It runs down the west coast along Dingle
Bay, from Rossbeigh to Waterville.
I beg its pardon. It runs from Tonn
Tóime to Carraig Eanna. Tonn Tóime
is one of The Three Great Waves of Erin,
the other two being Tonn Cliona, off the
coast of Cork, and Tonn Ruairi, off the
county Down. They roar and boom
thunderously when trouble threatens the
land and old men in mountain glens bless
themselves to ward it off. When Tóime's
wave crashes on the sandbank at the
tip of Rossbeigh strand I can hear it
here where I sit, twenty miles away.
Carraig Eanna lies half submerged at
the head of Ballinskelligs Bay, just under
Waterville, as treacherous today as it
was when it smashed up Eanna's galley
two thousand years ago and drowned
him and his fellow invaders. But Eanna's
people were afraid neither of rocks nor
natives. They sailed away, but came
back overland to attack the Firbolgs
from the rear. They drove them into
the monstrous cyclopean fortresses at
Staigue and Caherdonal and Cahergeal
and starved them into submission.
Staigue, the largest of the three, stands
silent and deserted in a stony glen overlooking
Kenmare Bay, bearing witness
to the industry of its builders and to the
futility of all static defences, be they
souterrains, castles or bomb-shelters,
against sustained attack. Mobility, or
defence in depth in the open air as it is
now called, is much more effective.
The O'Sheas were the strongest clan
in Iveragh until they got too big for their
boots, wore themselves out in tribal wars
and gave place to others. The people
coined a neat phrase to epitomise the
secular history of the barony in those
distant days. In English it runs :
" O'Shea was, O'Sullivan is, O'Connell
will be." Let us leave it at that and turn
to the good men, who tried to make good
christians of a fractious people.
Saint Fiónan Cam was the first to try.
He came across Dingle Bay from the
Brendan country and started in to convert
the pagans from their evil ways.
Then as now, clerics had to be part
apostles and part architects. Fionan was
both and he had imagination. When he
had built his beehive monastery on
Church Island in Lough Currane he turned
his strabismic (cam) eyes seawards to the
giant Skelligs and planned the impossible
-to build his finest monastery on the
dizzy peak of that sword-point of rock
shooting up from the ocean depths.
He performed the impossible and left
us, puny moderns, to wonder how he did
it. With bare hands and boundless zeal
he and his disciples scaled the sheer seven-hundred-
foot cliffs and planted on the
wind-swept summit the circle of cells,
which cover its bare top. On that eerie
perch lived many generations of prayerful
monks, fed the Lord knows how, until
the Danes found it out. They plundered
it so often that the brethren forsook it
and sought peace on the mainland.
Off the tip of southwest Britain lies
another group of seagirt rocks called
Scillys, and dedicated to the Archangel
Michael as our Skelligs are. Aye, and
away to the south on the Breton coast
stands St. Michael's Mount to complete
the triangle and set us guessing who
entrusted the rock-monasteries to St.
Michael and why they selected him for
guardian.
Ballinskelligs monastery was built
during the Danish raids, exactly a thousand
years ago. The Annals of Innisfallen
record the fact with the entry that
Blathmac, the Abbot of The Skelligs,
died in 950, the year he completed it. It
was a pleasant place, with green lawns
and garden paths leading to the sheltered
waters of the inner harbour. All that is
gone. A change in the current through
the Sound set the waters gnawing at the
land. A change in the faith of the
Powers-That-Were set human bloodhounds
despoiling the monks. The sea
has eaten through the pleasant lawns into
the very chancel of the monastery.
Packs of Bristol merchants and needy
soldiers tore its temporalities asunder
and gobbled them up. The abbey
awaits its final dissolution in the quiet
dignity of all dying things. Come and
see it. Then look around at the glorious
amphitheatre of soaring mountains and
prostrate sea, and be comforted. In
view of man's impotence and God's
omnipotence, your own cares and concerns
will fall from you, if only for the hour, and
you will feel the profound peace which
soothes the anxious soul.
And now be refreshed. Man can make
fun of his misfortune. St. Michael's
monastery on the Skelligs went down in
disaster. Its bells and its prayers were
silenced. Its flock was left to the wolves.
But not for ever. Life must go on and
life meant loving and mating, as well
as dying. Men and maids got married
and the business of marrying took place
in shrovetide. But shrovetide varied
with the variations of Easter and the
date of Easter was computed by the
Church.
The monks of St. Michael stuck to the
old method of dating Easter, long after
Rome had adopted a more accurate one,
and were often a week late in their
figuring. That would give an extra week
to a pair who had missed their chance
of marrying on the mainland and were
not afraid of a rough passage to the
Skelligs to correct the result of their
dalliance. Or so it was said. Anyhow,
the people saw possibilities in the
situation and started The Skelligs Lists.
Every town and village in Kerry had its
rhymster to pillory the lads and lasses
who should have married and didn't.
The verses were always humorous, often
clever in associating incongruous pairs
and sometimes, alas, malicious. It was
the malice which finally killed them.
Here is the opening of the Dingle
Skelligs List for 1894.
" Shrove Tuesday night, at close of day,
I chanced to be a-strolling, O ;
What would I see longside the Quay
But a pair of trawlers rolling, O.
They were for The Skelligs bound
With lads and lasses laden, O
Who said they'd rather far be drowned
Than live as stags and maidens, O.
The Roving Swan was first away,
Her passengers madly cheering, O
Each lad beside his lass so gay
Shawn Auss and Kit were steering, O.
The Victory soon followed close,
Her bow to the billows rising, O,
Joe Long so grand in his Sunday clothes
And Kate in her frills beside him, O.
The O'Connell Country
Iveragh and Dunkerron part company
on the narrow isthmus which separates
Lough Currane from Ballinskelligs Bay
On the Skelligs with a Camera
A friend of " The Capuchin Annual" took these photographs of The Skelligs when he visited them on a beautiful day in August in company with the author of the article
Tigh soluis
Tar éis teacht i dtír
The Little Skellig seen from Sceilg Mhichíl
The monastic cells
Stone walls
The entrance to one of the cells One of the ancient crosses
Radharc éin
Reilig an easbuig
Carraig a's slinn
in the heart of the O'Connell country.
Old Hunting Cap of Derrynane had
managed, by ruse and subterfuge, to keep
the hands of the Cromwellians off his wild
patrimony, and to increase it by smuggling
wines from France, so that, when it
came into The Liberator's hands, it
covered most of the land from Caherciveen
to Caherdaniel.
What a delightful country it is to the
eye. A lacework of lake, river and sea on
its hem and the bold sweep of mountains
against its sky. The view that is flung
in one's face at the top of Coomakista
is breathtaking. As if by magic, the
dark roadside cliffs are drawn aside to
reveal a measureless expanse of sea and
airy distance, faintly defined by tenuous
blue mountains. Beneath one, the land
slopes down to little coves with golden
sands and to the windblown trees which
shelter O'Connell's home at Derrynane
from the ocean gales. Ireland has few
prospects to compare with it.
But it is strange that although the
O'Connells were one of the last of the old
Gaelic stock to keep open house on their
native death and that The Counsellor
became an international figure of great
stature, local feeling and tradition are
disappointingly sparse, in regard to all
the O'Connells but Dan's wonderful aunt,
Maire Ni Dhuibh. She bore her husband
twenty-two children, managed him and
his property with matriarchal tyranny
and left enough satirical epigrams after
her to fill a book. It may be that Dan's
engagements made him just another
'absentee landlord' ; it may be that the
defection of his descendants to the
English side in politics set them a part
from their people. Whatever it was,
the O'Connells are remembered, not so
much for what their menfolk did, as for
the pithy sayings and thrifty good sense
of the O'Donoghue woman, who did most
to multiply them and consolidate their
position.
Dunkerron
Derrynane is in Dunkerron. Just outside
the O'Connell mansion, which stands.
low on the edge of a beautiful sandy
cove, there is an island called Acha Mór
and on the island a ruined monastery,
which went the way of all monasteries at
the Reformation. Few know that the
weatherbeaten convent of Acha Mor and
the lands which went with it once belonged
to Sir Walter Raleigh. Queen
Elizabeth gave them to him as a token
of her royal favour. When he fell out of
favour he passed them on to his buddy,
Boyle, of 'Boyle's Law.' Neither
Raleigh nor Boyle ever laid eyes on the
place or the people they acquired so
easily.
A mile further to the east is the smaller
of the two huge stone fortresses built by
the P-Celts in this ultimate corner of
Erin. Caherdonal, though still impressive
to look at, has suffered more from the·
weather than has Staigue Fort, to
which it may have been only an outpost.
It is a pity that visitors who speed
through and enjoy the rapid sequence
of beautiful scenes, do not turn aside into
the hills for a while to marvel at the
magnitude of Staigue and lift a hat to
the forgotten people who built it and
passed on.
From Staigue to Kenmare the eye
keeps switching right and left to glimpses.
of narrowing sea and reaches of moorland
climbing upwards to the sky. But nowhere does it find any trace of the
MacCarthys or O'Sullivans in ruined keep
or crumbled church. They were too
busy with war and the country was too poor
to protect or adorn. The O'Sullivans
did build a castle at Dunkerron, near
Kenmare, in 1596, when castles were out
of date. They occupied it for six short
years and fled when Sir Charles Wilmot
came and blew it down. Then came
Petty and because the history of Dunkerron and the neighbouring barony of
Glanarought from 1650 onwards was
shaped and moulded by that unscrupulous adventurer, Petty must get a few
paragraphs all to himself.
He was a physician, who came across with Cromwell's army and saw great Chances for the advancement of a clever
young man in the wholesale confiscation
of Irish lands. He threw away the pestle
and mortar and joined up with Taylor
in the Down Survey on which the plantation
was to be based. As he said himself,
“ I threw my chain over Ireland.'' In
three years he had acquired for himself
150,000 acres of Dunkerron and Glanarought, besides what he had grabbed
here and there throughout Ireland. When
Cromwell fell he was the first to shout
-God Save the King and send a contribution
to the royal treasury. James gave
him a knighthood and confirmed him
in his possessions.
He was a hustler. There is no doubt
about that. Getting no co-operation
from the natives, he went home to
England and brought back a colony of
miners, smiths, millwrights and boatbuilders
to exploit the resources of his
property. Their descendants, the Aldworths, the Mayburys, the Taylors, the
Parkers and the Palmers are here still, but now as Irish and papist as any of us. With their aid, Petty dug into the
bowels of the hills for copper and cut-down the primeval forests for fuel to
smelt it. When they were done the land
was as bare as a shorn sheep.
And he was a miser. Though rich as
Croesus, he hadn't the heart to buy an
earldom. Rather than part with the
money he contrived to marry his only
-daughter to the Earl of Kerry, a Fitzmaurice
of Clanmaurice. After his death
-the property went to the Fitzmaurices,
who for some reason best known to
-themselves chose the fine Wicklow name
-of Siol Brain (Shelburne) for their new
title. For their next rise in the peerage
they dug up the English name Lansdowne
which had some association with
the pettifogging Petty, who entrapped a
principality in a network of surveyors'
chains.
He made Kenmare. It stands strategically
at the junction of Dunkerron and
Glanarought and at the head of Kenmare
Bay. It is a snug 'little nest ' of a town,
from which roads radiate, north, south,
east and west, through the loveliest
landscapes in all Ireland. And to think
that the O'Sullivans once owned it all
and lost it because they could not combine.
They were proud enough and
brave enough. They proved it on the
continent when they were broken at
home. Prince Charlie's right-hand man
in the Forty-Five was General Sean
O'Sullivan, who had made his name
under Marshal Millebois in France and
Italy. They preferred to split into
competing branches that withered one
by one. Still, they can console themselves
with the thought that King Demos
would have dispossessed them by now
and that they are still numerous on
their native heath.
From Kenmare two fine roads run
southwards through Glanarought. One
strikes inland on a long climb by mountain
streams and dizzy cliffs up to the tunnel
at the county bounds. The other keeps
to the shore of the bay as far as Cloonee
lake. There it forks and leaves you
wondering whether you had better pursue
the delights of the coastal road as far
as Direen, which Lansdowne transformed
into an Irish tropic of flowering plants,
or take the high road into the glens,
through lovely Glenmore, and up the
wonderful way to the Healy Pass. If you
are in doubt you are in luck, 'for then
you will go one way and return by the
other and have the best of both ways.
Whatever you do, don't miss the
people. They are more delightful than
the country in which they live. Friendly,
courteous, quick-witted and hospitable,
as all Kerry folk are, the people of
Glanarought will take you to their heart,
entertain you and speed you on your way
with wings on your own heart. You will
be the better for having met them.
For that matter, don't ever think of
going through any part of Kerry incommunicado.
The people are worthy
of their supremely beautiful setting.
Stop your car anywhere and speak to the
first man you meet on mountain slope or
rocky shore. If there is a beam in your
own eye it will find a twinkle in his. His
time is yours in kindly fellowship, and
what he knows is yours for the asking.
If you are dry, ' Herself ' has the kettle
on the hob for a cup of tea with a jug
of cream to colour it, and if you are in
the humour for talk, she has a nice flow
of friendly chat to keep it going.
Johnny Paterson loved his Kerry
audiences and composed most of his
songs for them. It was an ' American
wake' in Dingle that inspired him to
write I'm Off To Philadelphia which he
sang for the first time in Tralee when I
was a boy. He died in Tralee and told
his confessor with his last breath he was
glad to start out from ' a Heaven on
earth to a Heaven on high.' Kerry
loved him, too, and gave him the greatest
funeral clown ever got, even Grock or
Grimald[?].
The End Of An Era
Kerry hasn't changed much in appearance
since Ciar's time. But the people
have changed a lot, if not in appearance,
at least in manners and customs. Think
of it. Sixty generations have come,
possessed the land and gone their ways
since Ciar. I have known the last three
and I can assure you that there is a
world of difference between that into
which I was born and this into which I
have survived.
The big noises, then, were the land
agents, with their retinue of rent-warners,
bog-rangers and process-servers,
running in and out of the rent-office, like September wasps. We seldom saw the olympian landlords. They spent their
days in London, with an occasional run
home to Dublin for a foregathering in
Kildare Street. But we saw too much
of their agents.
Captain De Moleyns, Johnny the
Captain and Tomas a' Phóna regulated
the lives of Corca Dhuibhne. Their
word was law. Townsend Trench who
ended up as a concocter of patent medicines,
was the little god in the machine
for Lord Lansdowne's subjects in Glanarought
and Dunkerron. Killarney was
held in fee by Maurice Leonard. His
smile was granted only to the suppliant~
who grovelled, hat in hand, on the
office floor and paid his rent on the nail.
How well I remember the May and
November influx of struggling farmers
to Killarney, their whispered colloguings
in snugs, the consequent visits to the
banks to back each other for a fiver or a
tenner to meet the current gale's rent,
and the final approach to the rent-office
in fear and trembling. Though they had
the rent in their pockets, there was
always that 'hanging gale' to keep their
tails between their legs, the gale the
agent would never accept. Though
they owed only one gale in fact, they
owed two on the books, and could be
ejected, if Leonard was in a black
humour. That was the law.
To administer the law, there was the
resident magistrate, a hundred armed
policemen at hand in Killarney, and a
regiment of redcoats at call in Tralee.
The whole set-up was the model for that
operating in occupied Germany to-day.
The R.M. was usually an army officer,
who had had experience of hostile tribes
in the Far East. Ours was a Major
Crane, a great burly man, who exuded
' culture,' spoke Oxford English in a
clarety voice, dined in a fixed round with
the 'gentry' of Kerry and administered
the law, which buttressed them in their
ascendancy, with inexorable sternness.
But Kerry captured even him. That
is, the Kerry which delighted his aesthetic
eye; the people were untouchables. He
wrote a handbook on Kerry, its transcendent
scenery and its ancient monuments,
with never a word about the good people
who inhabited the scenes, or their fathers,
who built the monuments. As a guide
book it is the best of its kind ; as a record
Df what must have been an unusual
experience for an educated man it is as
dead as an out-of-date timetable.
That is a pity. He must have had a
lot to say about the minor landlords and
middlemen in whose houses he fed.
Neither he nor they guessed that their
day was done for the Leahys, the
Mahonys, the Griffins, the Blennerhassets,
the Sandeses and the Coltsman-Cronins,
or he might have written their swansong.
What tales he could have told of Jack
Coltsman, who spent his days trolling
for trout on Lough Lein and his nights
drinking the proceeds in town bars,
while his brother sat alone in the pretentious
castle overlooking the Flesk.
Or of the two Griffin brothers, who lived
out their lives on remittances from the
Court of Chancery. They starved until
the pay-orders came and blew each one
in a glorious carouse in a pub in Firies.
Perhaps, Crane never heard of the night
they woke up at home, 'broke' to the
world and very sorry for themselves
when John took out his pipe for solace.
Groping in his pocket he found a box of
matches and was proceeding to strike
one, when Edward intervened.
"For shame, John ! Wasting a match
and the fire in front of you."
The last two of The MacCarthys of
Headford, let their branch of the great
Maccarthy Mor family die by default.
They never married, though they might
have had the pick of the girls of their
class, for both Master Maurice and
Master Denis were fine men, with that
touch of breeding that comes from intermarriage
as much as from length of
pedigree. Maurice was a remarkable
man. He became an attorney, practised
in Killarney and became a legend for
the way he jigged through cracks in the
law to win the forlorn cases he loved to
get. I saw him in action many a time
and enjoyed the cold wink he used throw
across the court at the opposing counsel.
I was almost an actor in one of his
minor triumphs.
Mrs. Bourke, a newly-wed girl, rushed
home from the middle of her honeymoon,
leaving her husband for some reason
which neither she nor he ever divulged.
While the anger was on her she engaged
Master Maurice to write to the husband
to refund her fortune and, when he refused,
to proceed at law for the recovery
of her five hundred pounds. But when
the anger cooled down and the Quarter
Sessions drew near, she bethought herself.
She could never face the court.
So she asked me and a mutual friend to
get Maurice to withdraw the case and
let the fortune go.
He received us and our new instructions
with a poker face and tapped his
blotting pad with his pince-nez glasses
for a while in thought. Then he spoke
into his telephone.
" Donovan, call up Doctor O'Connell
in Tralee and put me through when you
get him." Then to us: "O'Connell is
the boyo' s solicitor."
The inter-room bell rang. "You're
through now, Sir."
Maurice took up the phone.
" That you, O'Connell ? About that
Bourke case. My client, Mrs. Bourke,
is here with me. She has changed her
mind. She wants an adjournment to
next sessions to sue her father-in-law,
for defamation, in addition to the trover
case. It will suit all parties to ....
What's that you say ? Bourke is there
with you? Good. Take your time and
talk sense into him. I'll hold the line."
Not as much as a glance did he throw
at us, while he waited for the Doctor to
speak and doodled with the receiver on
the table. He clapped it to his ear when
it came alive and listened.
"No, no. My client would never
accept that. Tell your man he'll be
stuck for both decrees. The land must
pay for all. What's that?"
He listened to the Doctor patiently
and spoke again.
" And all my costs, taxed up to
today?"
The Doctor came in again and then
Master Maurice had the last word:
"Very well. If I have your own
cheque for five hundred and fifty pounds
in the morning, you can consider both
cases withdrawn. Right. Just as yon
say. Good morning, good morning."
Then he turned his pale-moon face on
us and gave us an almost imperceptible
wink.
" It worked. You see, I could afford
to gamble. I had nothing to lose once
Mrs. Bourke threw in her hand, but
O'Connell didn't know that. Send her
in to-morrow and she'll get her money.
Good morning."
Pity he let his breed die out.
It is remarkable how many of the old
families died out sine prole around the
turn of the century. The levelling up of
the common man by popular education
and growing trade discouraged the worn-out
products of privilege. They became
celibates.
The last representative of O'Sullivan
Mór was the dispensary doctor at Rathmore,
a quiet, conscientious man who
shunned the light and passed away
without flags or fanfare, gan tuireamh,
gan chluichi caointe. The Mahonys of
Dunloe dried up in Kean Mahony of
Cullinagh, a full namesake of the Cian O
Mathghamhna, who fought beside Morcha
O'Brien at Clontarf and cut his way
through the Fitzpatricks on his way
home. From Cian to Kean a thousand
years of unceasing bickering for ill-gotten
lands, then extinction ! The O'Donoghues
flickered up for a while in the
spectacular person of The O'Donoghue,
who fought a parliamentary election in
the popular interest, and won it in scenes
of great excitement in Tralee. This was
the chant which put him in :
Vote for Th' O'Donoghue,
Says the Shan Van Vocht.
Vote for Th' O'Donoghue,
Says the Shan Van Vocht
Vote for that gallant man,
Nephew to Immortal Dan,
For Faith and Fatherland,
Says the Shan Van Vocht.
He was a great talker and was mentioned
for cabinet rank, but he fizzled
out as a damp squib. When his star set,
he and the family went off to Ballinahown,
near Athlone, the home of the Ennises
their relatives by marriage. That doesn't
mean that there are no more O'Donoghues
in Magonihy. Thank God, the glens are
full of the ' Dacent Donoghues.'
And what about the O'Connor Kerry ?
Surely, an O'Connor will not refuse them
a valedictory notice in his recital of
' Sios-chéim na nGaodhal.' Perhaps it
would be disloyal to omit them, but
there isn't much to say with certainty.
After the defeat of Cnoc na nDos and the
execution of The O'Connor Kerry at
Killarney, his blood vanished like water
flowing into sand. His heritage was
divided between the Gunns of Ratoo, the
Hollys of Tarbert and The Sandeses of
Sallowglin and his heir went into hiding
with friends. Lord Kenmare, to spite
the Cromwellian parvenus, gave him a
farm at Firies, where the family gradually
declined and faded out into the ordinary
ceithearnach stock.
A Rev. Richard O'Connor of Dublin
claimed that he was the last O'Connor of
Carrigafoyle, through the Sallowglin
branch, and wrote his pedigree in great
detail in a manuscript, which I saw in
1930. But it was labour in vain. Sure
we all claim to be of the ' Rale Root.'
"I'm an O'Connor of Carrigafoyle
My blood is so blue it refuses to boil."
The Common Folk
Having got rid of the people of the Big
Houses we are free to hobnob with their
betters, the common folk who endured
their yoke through the centuries and
survive to laugh at it all. Listowel was
full of bustle and turmoil when I came to
know it in 1886. Business was good but
the 'Agitation' was in full blast. Butter
seemed to keep every one going. The
top of Church Street was deafened by
the rumble of butter barrels spinning
on the teames in Corridan's, the cooper's.
Forge Lane rang with anvils riveting
the hoops to bind the staves and shaping
the iron stamps for branding the farmers'
names on the butter barrels. Through
the din, the tap tap of Jacky the Nailer's
hammer penetrated like a woodpecker's
song. Coopers and nailers, smiths and
weavers hard at work and every manjack of them a character well worth
knowing.
But a dark cloud hung over them all,
in town and country. The Plan of
Campaign was on and every day brought
news of moonlight raids on land agents
and retaliatory arrests and convictions.
Listowel buzzed like a hive of wasps the
day Poff and Barrett were brought into
the Bridewell under military escort,
charged with murder. I was too young
to understand the emotions which brought
Billy Behane, in bazil apron, from his
anvil, Mat Quill, covered with fluff,
from his loom, and Jacky, dancing with
excitement and squeezing his little
hammer nervously. Or why bewhiskered
Canon Davis moved through the crowd,
shepherding angry men out from the
thick of it and escorting them home.
I was more interested in the seven-foot
giant from Ennismore who towered over
the crowd, gaping foolishly from his
grandstand height. We knew him by
the absurd name his fond mother gave
him before he grew up. We loved
Laylum (Laogh Liom). He had a mind
like ours, played our games-it was a
scream to see him knuckle down to
marbles-and was always in good
humour. John O'Neill, the schoolmaster,
gave us just as much fun, though
we dare not play with him. O, no. In
school he was a downright tyrant but
he had a shop at the top of William
Street that was better than a circus. He
sold the most unexpected things and
said so in the most extraordinary legend
ever painted on a shopfront. It covered,
in large letters, every inch of the front
from ground to eave and read :
The Emporium.
Supplies All The Needs of Man and Beast.
From a Needle to an Anchor; an Eagle to an
Elephant,
An Igloo, a Castle; Rhinoceros or Hippopotamus.
Are All to be bought on the Premises of
John O'Neill,
Philanthropist and Philomath.
Wedding Rings Hammers and Sledges
Teething Rings Plumb Bobs and Wedges
Wedding Bells Currants and Raisins
Passing Bells Buckets and Basins
The Cup that Cheers Coffins and Shrouds
The Mug for Beer Funeral Crowds
But Seón Burns (Seón not Seán, be it
remembered) was our darling. He was
the Strong-Man-Who-Didn't-Know-His
Strength. He was believed to have no
ribs, like you and me, but two solid
plates of bone from shoulder to hip on
both sides. We saw him in town only
on fair-days, a quiet stocky man, standing
herd over a bunch of cattle and then
sitting in a pub over pints of stout till
he was full. But we knew all about him.
About the day when his horse stuck in
the bog with a load of turf and Seón untackled him and went between the shafts
himself and pulled cart and turf out of
the slough and all the way home to
Duagh.
And about the joke the police sergeant
played on a Johnny Raw recruit, who
didn't know Seón was as quiet as a lamb,
drunk or sober, if he was left alone. The
sergeant was sitting in the dayroom with
the young constable, when Seón sailed
past, three sheets in the wind, on his
way home.
'' That fella is drunk, constable. Bring
him in and let him sober up in the cell.
That'll teach him. "
" Right O. Watch me handle him. "
This was his big chance. He ran after
Seón and grabbed him by the shoulder:
"Come on, come on," he said importantly.
"Where, achree ?" Seón asked quietly,
standing as solid as a tree.
'' Where you and all the other drunks
should be-in the cells." Seón put his
hand behind the recruit's neck, forced it
towards him downwards till it was kneehigh;
then coolly took the poor fellow
by the slack of the pants and the tunic
collar, carried him like a bag of spuds
to the barrack wall and threw him over
into the garden.
The sergeant had vanished.
Dingle was just as busy as Listowel
when I went there in 1890. But fish
was the "business," not butter. The
place reeked with the smell of mackerel
and the harbour was black with Manx
nobbies, which had followed the fish like
hounds, killing them in tens of thousands.
Money was dirt cheap in the quayside
pubs. Canoemen from the Blaskets
thought nothing of 'breaking' a fiver
to stand a round of drinks for the ' road,'
the road being the twenty mile run by
sea in their frail, canvas naomhóga to
some distant creek in the west.
Nobbyman, hookerman and canoeman,
'twas all the same. The alteration from
midnight slavery at sea to care-free
affluence ashore made characters of them
all. Tom Cain of Peel, Sean Auss of
Dingle and Pats Dawley from Innishikeelane swaggered and clashed and made
friends again whenever the boats came in,
sunk to the gunnel with mackerel. But
it is not the memory of the mackerel
millionaires that comes back to me from
those boisterous days. They kept me in
a perpetual state of expectation, but
they always moved in crowds and the
memory prefers individuals to crowds.
The two Mickies, Micky na gCloch and
Micky Greefeen, stand out as clear as
the two pillarstones of Geata na Glóire
on Miltown Height. Micky na gCloch
was an untidy old man who did odd jobs
about town for the police, the coastguards
and the parson. He was the last
of the 'soupers,' the poor wretches who
had turned protestant in the Bad Times
when Parson Gayer enlisted all the
powers of Lord Ventry's estate office for
a big push to reach the papists' benighted
souls through their empty bellies. Micky
was one of the few who did not revert to
the old Faith when the Franco-Prussian
war brought back prosperity and freedom
of action.
There was a cogent reason for Micky's
intransigence. The proselytising branch
of the Church Body had adopted his
son, Joseph, and put him through
Trinity to the ministry, in which he was
expected to make a name for himself
and the Church Body as The Rev. Mister
O'Sullivan, M.A., B.D. Meanwhile old
Micky was getting a small subsistence
allowance and a monopoly of the odd
jobs the protestants had to give him.
That's how he came to plant cabbage
for us in our little front garden. The
parson interceded for him with my
father, who dared not refuse. The protestants
ran the railway.
Before I finish with Micky I must
dispose of his son. The Rev. Joseph
became a handful for the Church Body.
He was restless and crossed over to
England to complete his divinity course,
where the daub of papist scarlet was not
as shameful as in Trinity. But even
there he was unhappy, for the name
O'Sullivan made him suspect.
So, he worked his passage from Liverpool
to the States and tramped the New
England backwoods as a lay preacher,
until he married money, which enabled
him to finish his divinity course in
Toronto. He was a queer mixture of
peacock pride in his own little talents
and of a mongrel subservience to his
social superiors.
He lay bare his streaky soul in his
autobiography, Becoming an American.
To certify the soundness of his protestantism
he christened his three sons
Luther Strong Sullivan (without the
damnatory O) Cranmer Luke and
Wycliffe Osborne, respectively. To
curry favour with the captains of industry
he forsook the pulpit for the tub and
turned the fires of his eloquence against
the movement of Labour to rise to its
feet before the first World War.
Alas ! his sons died young and the
dollar captains discarded him when the
war was over, as they discarded worn out
equipment. All that was left to him was
his overweening belief in himself, '' A
brand snatched from the burning " he
called himself. His schoolboy companions
called him Moses !
I didn't like Micky at first. He was,
I thought, a sly old wheedler, always
making excuses for a chat and a sitdown
beside his lazy spade. It was easy
to find one, for the garden gave a grand
view, across the town end of the harbour,.
to the quayside street, the long pier and
the open anchorage on the bosom of the
harbour. Two seagulls squabbling for
offal, the faint sound of raised voices on
the pier or the appearance of a strange
nobby at the harbour's mouth, any old
thing, was grist for Micky's talk-mill.
But he didn't strike a flash off me
until the evening I brought out my 'Laoi
Oisin' and sat on the garden wall to·
' pound ' the morning's task in the
westering sun. Micky sidled down to me.
" What's that you're readin', a
haishge ?''
"Something you wouldn't know,
Micky. It's Celtic," I told him importantly
and turned back to memorise my
lines aloud. He cocked his ear and
listened to me mouthing the bribes.
Niamh offered Oisin to come away with
her:
" Do gheabhair fleadh, imirt agas ól,
Do gheabhair ceol binn ar théad ;
Do gheabhair airgead agas ór,
Do gheabhair fós iomad séad."
"Ha, ha !" Micky laughed loud with
his face wide open to the sky. " Ha,
ha! I always knew you were a boyo.
You an' your Celtic. Sure I know that
old story since I could suck a hin-egg.',
And he started it from the very beginning,
at which I had begun three months before.
" A Oisin uasail, a mhic an righ,
Dob' fhearr gniomh, gaisge agas gliath ; ·
Aithris dúinn anois gan mhairg
Cionus do mhairis tar éis, na bhFiann.',
It was a thrilling performance. He
stopped at the hard passages to explain
them and to tell me about Oscar and the
heroes of the Fianna. He had not
finished when the sun went down behind
Mount Eagle and the call to supper came
from the house. But we had it next
evening, and the next, to the very end.
" A Phadraig, sin agat mo sgéal
Mar tharla dhom féin gan gó ;
Mo dhul agus m'imtheacht go beacht,
Is mo theacht tar m'ais o Thir na nOg."
Micky produced an anticlimax the
following day by reciting with equal
gusto an English version of Cath Fionntrágha. Done into slipshod pentametre
by an unknown versifier, it reduced the
grand epic near to bathos, even to my
schoolboy ear. Speaking of the sudden
awakening of Conn Crithir, who had
fallen asleep at his post it ran :
“Right off his back, in one great mighty
bound,
He cleared nine ridges of potato ground."
But then, Micky knew very little
English ; not half enough to make him
the purist in English he was in Gaelic.
But he was a great seanachie.
Micky Greefeen was the last of the
professional 'Caoiners' in Corkaguiney.
He was also the last man you would associate
with wails and lamentations, he was so
jolly and looked so jolly, anywhere but
at a funeral. Strong, redfaced and loud
of welcome to all he met at home on his
farm or in town at a fair, Micky was a
general favourite. At wakes and funerals
he was a changed man, aloof and absorbed
in deep meditation, as a poet
pursuing an inspiration. And that was
just what he was doing, marshalling the
virtues of the dear deceased and throwing
them into sequence for the long road to
the cemetery.
I shall always remember the first time
I saw, or rather heard, him officiating.
Young Muiris 'c Gearailt had died in the
workhouse hospital, leaving a widow and
three children after him, and a host of
friends who were shocked by his tragic
death. The road outside the hospital
gate was lined on both sides by red
carts, full of shawled women facing the
rear, and bluecoated, blackhatted men
on the shafts, facing the horses.
Nearly an hour after the appointed
time the coffin was borne out on shoulders
and placed on the Fitzgerald cart. The
young widow, in her handsome Sunday
shawl, was helped up, in a subdued
murmur of sympathy which lasted until
she seated herself on the coffin and
raised her hands to start the funeral
chant as custom demanded.
" Oh-0-0-0-oooh ! Vuirish, a chree
lioom," she cried in the fulness of her
wretchedness welcoming the chance
which the wise, old custom gave her of
liberating her imprisoned grief in one
wild scream.
"Voe ! Voe ! Voe ! What did I do
to you, Death, to rob me and my poor
orphans and what did my poor Muiris
do, that you took him from us?
Oh-0-0-000."
Micky, who stood behind the cart
among the near relatives, raised his hand,
when he saw Father Dan's old garron
move off down the hill towards Raheen í
Thuaidh. Then he released a long, lonesome,
ear-splitting wail, intoned in a sort
of Gregorian chant .
" Och-och-0-0-0-one ! Ochóne agus
olagóne-o-o ! ''
As if at a signal, the carts sorted themselves
into line in a noisy clatter of axles.
The widow went silent and slumped over
the coffin. Her driver shook the reins
and moved off, closely followed by the
next-of-kin and Micky. Behind him
came a group of women of the town,
draped in thin shawls and walking
abreast. They were the tragic chorus.
When Micky broke into the tuireamh,
Deelis Strand (between Camp and Castlegregory). The Salthouse coming up!
Carnival Queen, Castlegregory, 1950
Miss Frances Moynihan with her ladies-in-waiting (left to right) : Misses Eileen Rohan, Kitty Moriarty,
Patricia Farrell, Beatrice Keane, Josephine Moynihan and Margaret Scanlon.
A cross to commemorate the Holy
Year was erected on top of Mount
Brandon (the second highest mountain
in Ireland, 3,127 ft.) on 2 July, 1950.
The cross was erected and the Rosary recited by the Very Reverend J.J. O'Connor, P.P.,
Castlegregory, and a group of parishioners. 
One man and his dogs -in West Kerry
the dirge he had prepared for Muiris,
they supplied the antiphonal support.
Micky: "A Mhuire na nGrás 's a
Mháthair an Aoin-Mhic."
Chorus: "Och, ochóne is olagóne-O."
Micky : '' Tá Muiris ar lár 'sa ál beag
traochta."
Chorus: "Och, ochóne is olagóne-O."
They kept it up all the way to Raheen í
Thuaidh, past the bridge at Miltown,
through the pillars of Geata na Glóire
and up the hill to the little churchyard
above Burnham. I did not go the whole
way, but stopped with the townsmen,
who walked their mile of respect and
returned to their business. From where
I stood on the slope of Knockacarn
I caught snatches of Micky's dirge
coming back on the wind, muted in the
hollows of the road and loud again, when
the receding line of carts rose into view
on the swelling ground. The faintness
of the sounds had a wraithlike melancholy
which made me shiver and go home.
That evening I saw Micky, his own
jolly self again over a deoch an doruis
in John Long's pub, before he took the
road home through the Maum to Ventry.
He was the last of his kind, and when he
himself took the road to the west for
the last time, there was none to sing his
praises or turn an olagóne on the wind.
There were Mickies and Seóns and
Teigues all over the county in those days,
as there are today. They gave colour
to life and made Kerry, of the beautiful
back-scenes, their stage. May their light
shine perpetual in the land. Without
them it would be only a beautiful desert.
No wise man would try to describe
that beauty. Mrs. Hall made a gallant
effort a hundred years ago, to do it
justice with pen and burin. Richard
Hayward tried it yesterday. In between,
heavier guns had a shot at it and missed.
Moore gives us sound advice. Leave it
to others.
" Sweet Innisfallen, fare thee well,
May calm and sunshine long be thine.
How fair thou art let others tell,
While but to feel how fair is mine."
Thackeray gave it up, too. " The
fact is, and I don't care to own it," he
wrote in 1826: "The lakes are too handsome."
Local tradition sums it all up
in a tale of Henry Arthur Herbert, the
last of the breed who owned Muckross
and walled off its precincts and policies
from the common herd. When he came
to die he asked that his bed be moved to
the window that he might gaze out at his
terrestrial paradise. With his dying
breath he sighed "Oh, Muckross ! how
can I leave you ? ''
But Kerry betrays people into poetry.
Moore and Allingham and the rest came
only at the tail of the long succession
of Gaelic bards who sang Laudate et
Gaudete down the ages. - For me, the best
singer of them all was the Fear Gan
Ainm, who stood entranced on the hill
which fills my view to the east and gave
vent to the words I could wish were
my own.
" Maidin aoibhinn, áluinn,
Ar bharra Phrospect Hall dom,
Ag amharc ar Ghleann Atha dhom
'Sar bhárr Locha an Ghrinn,
Mar a mbíonn an bradán feárna
Is an leabhar-bhreac 'na tháin-rith
Is gach saghas éisg, dá áilleacht,
Ag preabarnaig 'sa linn."
That's his opening. I make it my
ending.
