In the summer of 1921, when the War
of Independence waged by the Republican Army was at its highest
pitch, and the Black and Tans, Lloyd
George and Winston Churchill's agents,
were paying dearly for the Terror, while
through the world all just men were
ranged on Ireland's side, Lloyd George
put a pregnant question to General Sir
Nevil Macready, commanding the Imperialist
forces.
"What," asked the Welshman, "is the
military alternative to a settlement with
Sinn Fein ? "
Macready replied: "A Cromwellian
re-settlement.''
Lloyd George said: " I want a book
on that.''
So Macready borrowed from Baron de
Robeck's library a copy of Prendergast's
Cromwellian Settlement Of Ireland, a standard
work which first appeared in 1865,
and sent the volume to Lloyd George,
who ran through it rapidly, and learnt
his lesson. Havoc and desolation, massacre
of civilians and extirpation of a
fighting race-that was the Cromwellian
method. For three hundred years, Welsh
Cromwell's name has been execrated.
Was the Welsh Premier of Great Britain
to undertake the same task and earn
the same shame ?
Almost immediately after returning his
lesson-book to Macready, Lloyd George
called the Truce. This is a story for the
truth of which the present writer can
vouch; though it has not appeared before
in any history of the time or biography of
David Lloyd George. The purpose of the
essay that follows is to offer, in shorter
compass than Prendergast's work, an
account of Cromwell in Ireland 300
years ago.
*
On the feast-day of Our Lady in
Harvest, 15 August 1649, Oliver Cromwell,
Lord Lieutenant and General for the
Parliament of England, landed at Ringsend,
which at that time was the quayside
for ships reaching Dublin. " He
brought with him the strongest and best
equipped army that had ever landed in
Ireland-8,000 foot ; 4,000 horse ; a
powerful train of artillery. Four thousand
men had already preceded this formidable
force, making in all, when added to the
former garrison of Dublin, about 20,000
men-strong, fierce and fanatical men,
thirsting for Irish blood. The military
chest contained £200,000 in cash,"-the
equivalent of twenty times that sum
today.
Cromwell had come well prepared to
carry out "a godly thorough reformation" : or, more accurately, to wage a
fearful war of repression.
What manner of man was he ?
Born in London in 1599, of a Welsh
family named Williams, which had intermarried
with the Cromwells, he was
grand-nephew of Thomas Cromwell,
secretary of Cardinal Wolsey, who had
grown enormously rich on the plunder of
the monasteries in King Henry's time.
Oliver was called Cromwell in honour of
the wealthy side of his ancestry, but
was " alias Williams " to his life's end.
He was the most able, the most forceful,
the most ruthless of all the caste of
adventurers who plundered the Church
and the poor-those who overthrew the
ancient kingship lest it bring back
popular liberty and the old religion.
He rose to pre-eminence among the
men of the Commonwealth (as they called
the Republic of the Rich) by dint of
his remarkable military skill. He welded
the army of the rebels into the most
powerful fighting machine of the age.
He had some strange genius for the use
of cavalry, and gave the Parliamentary
army exceptional speed, mobility and
striking force. He paid his men well-he
was a business man in arms. His colonels
received incomes bigger than our specialist
physicians today, captains had salaries
equal to our high civil servants, and his
troopers of the line about £5 a week,
not mentioning plunder. It was a paying
business to be a soldier of Cromwell ;
and mighty paying to be a Cromwell for
Oliver made an income as big as a
modern millionaire's.
Oliver Cromwell, however, was something
more than an exceedingly tenacious,
shrewd, skilful fighter, mighty in
execution of his ruthless plans. He was
a fanatic, with a gift of fanatical utterance
that might pass for genius, if it were put
to better use. His religion was that
strange, heretical perversion of Christianity
which could move men to trances
and raptures, to slaughters and extravagances,
exactly like Islam, which it so
much resembled. Was he merely cynical
-as some others of the Puritan religion
were-when he harangued his men, and
worked with them up play on the Hebrew
Scriptures to a conviction that they were
God's elect, and the enemies were Philistines
and Amalekites, whom it was their
duty to slay ? One thinks not.
The language of the man, the wild
perverted poetry of it, could not be put
on for mere policy. Cromwell believed in
himself, and believed in his cause. He
did mean what he said when he described
a victory as " a crowning mercy." He
was possessed like Mohammed.
A dual motive runs through the man
and the movement. Half it was black
hatred of the Faith, half it was greed,
that moved the Puritans and their great
Captain. For years before 1649, the
liquidation of Ireland had been planned.
In 1642, the enterprise was treated like
a speculation by a joint stock company
of modern times : that is to say, shares.
were issued in a fund for the conquest,.
expropriation and settlement of Ireland.
The list may be read in Prendergast's
volume of" The Names and Subscriptions.
of the Adventurers for Lands in Ireland,
as also of those who subscribed for ye
Sea Service." John Pym, chief of the
Republicans, headed the list. Over
2,000 names appear, of members of
Parliament and others, who took from
£20 to £50, or even £1,000 or more, of
shares in this fund of £292,711 4s. 8d.
(so precise is the total) that would be
expended on the exploitation of Ireland.
" Oliver Cromwell, Esq.," is found among
the subscribers. He took £600 of shares.
Unhappily for the speculators, it took
several years to get the mastery of King
Charles II in his own country. Pym
himself died, while the Civil War went
on; and so Cromwell came to the front
as the chief Republican figure. When
Charles was captured, some of the Adventurers
were undecided about his fate.
Even a Puritan had qualms about regicide.
Cromwell had no qualms. Death to the
king-that was his purpose. The dictator
in him demanded death. So, after
an illegal trial, the king was sentenced
and duly butchered, while the drums
rolled to drown any cry of protest.
So now, with England under his iron heel
Cromwell could take up his Irish purpose.
He had compassed the death of his king.
Now he designed the murder of a nation.
The moneys subscribed by him and his
fellow-adventurers seven years earlier,
were now to yield enormous returns.
There was all the wealth of Ireland for
loot.
*
Never in Irish history had there been
a more miserable period than the mid-seventeenth century. For the nation was
racked by faction to the pitch almost of
anarchy, at the very time when the
Puritan conspirators were planning its
destruction.
There were diverse parties in the field
which changed sides and alliances in
rapid shifts. The Ormondists-the followers
of the viceroy-held a great part
of the country; but the Puritans held
Dublin. The Anglo-Irish, under Preston,
were in the field in Leinster. In the
south was Inchiquin, obedient to the
English Parliament. Ulster was divided
between the Irish under Owen Roe
O'Neill, and the Scots under Monroe.
These groups fought today and were
friends tomorrow-allies changed to foes,
and no man knew whom to trust.
Owen Roe O'Neill, noblest of his
name, was probably the greatest soldier
who ever fought for Ireland. Famous
Don Eugenio of the Spanish Army,
defender of Arras, he was the one man
of Cromwell's own calibre as a soldier,
fit to meet and defeat him. Ah ! but
this lion of Ireland had been worried
and pestered by the quarrelling jackals
who were Ireland's masters. The General
Assembly-the Parliament of the Catholic
Confederation-feared the greatness
and nobility of O'Neill too much to
entrust the good cause to him. Instead
he was frustrated, humiliated, subordinated.
The wretched Catholic Anglo-Irish
were prejudiced against a Gael of the
Old Irish. Contrast their meanness with
his magnanimity ! " I know no difference
between Old Irish and New Irish," he
said, "and count any man a devil who
makes such distinction. I count all Irish."
Monroe tried to win O'Neill over to
the Parliamentary side, and reminded
him of the betrayal of those Catholics
in the past who served the Crown. Let
O'Neill ally himself to Republican England,
and get good terms for his people !
O'Neill did toy with the proposal; but
nothing came of it. Ormond, when
Cromwell had landed, realised that he
must secure O'Neill's aid and offered
him terms. If Owen Roe would fight
Cromwell for the Assembly, the Assembly
would grant the Ulstermen possession of
their own land, and equality with the
Anglo-Irish in future citizenship. Like
his uncle, Hugh of Tyrone in the generation
before, Owen Roe had exacted
tardy equity from the representatives of
the English Crown.
Alas and alas !-already the great
warrior, the noble statesman, the king-that-
might-be of the Gael, was sickening.
He had been struck down by some
mysterious ailment, in the city of Derry,
and his mind was losing grip. " God
help him-he talks of freeing Ireland
first, and afterwards expelling the Turk
from Europe."
*
There was worse than a Turk in
Ireland. On the last day of August,
Cromwell marched out of Dublin, with
ten thousand men. His objective was
Drogheda, into which Ormond had rushed
a garrison of mixed Irish and English
troops (so it seems), under command of
a Catholic Royalist, Sir Arthur Ashton.
"No man in the Royal Army was of a
greater reputation," wrote a contemporary
historian, of Ashton, this warrior
who had served in Poland against the
Turks, and had fought for Charles at
Edgehill. Unhappily, the troops under
Ashton were only a quarter of the number
of the attackers, and they were ill-armed.
The fight was unequal from the
outset when, on September 3, Cromwell's
forces were flung around the town
beside the Boyne.
Drogheda in those days was one of
the chief places of Ireland, well-built,
handsome, prosperous; an intact portion
of the fabric of mediaeval Anglo-Ireland :
in a word, a prize for the victor. Cromwell
opened fire on it with guns, the
heaviest of the time, to which the defenders
replied as best they could with
lighter weapons and scanty powder.
After two or three hundred shots, the
corner tower was beaten down and two
breaches made in the walls, to the east
and the south.
Cromwell demanded the town's surrender.
It was refused. Thereupon he
held himself excused for what followed.
His storming parties went in-a thousand
of his Roundheads entered the town,
and were driven out ; again and again,
the attack was renewed. Officers promised
quarter to such of the defenders
as would lay down arms. Seeing further
resistance vain, many yielded. Resistance
at last collapsed. Drogheda was at
Cromwell's mercy.
Jones reported to Cromwell that " all
the flower of the Irish army" was in
his hands. The Lord General thereupon
directed that promises of quarter (under
which they had yielded) should be disregarded,
and the whole of the defenders
slaughtered. The old Governor, Sir Arthur
Ashton, was put to death by battering
out his brains, after which his body was
chopped to pieces by those whom Cromwell
was wont to call the Lord's Anointed.
Only one officer, a lieutenant, escaped
slaughter. At least three regiments of
soldiers were hewn down by the Puritan
swords, or piked.
For twenty-four hours the bloody work
went on ; it did not stop at the slaying
of disarmed soldiers, but the blood-lust,
and the hatred of a Catholic people, so
inflamed Cromwell's men that civilians, ·
man, woman and child, were attacked.
Fugitives hiding in the lofts and galleries
of church and tower, were pursued by
Cromwell's men, who snatched up children
and used the little bodies as bucklers,
“ to keep themselves from being shot or
brained," as they forced their way.
That horror is told by a Puritan
witness, who took part. He proceeds :
" After they had killed all in the church,
they went into the vaults underneath,
where all the flower and choicest of the
women and ladies had hid themselves.
One of these, a most handsome virgin
and arrayed in costly and gorgeous
approach, kneeled down to Thomas Wood
with tears and prayers to save her life ;
and being struck with a profound pity,
he took her under his arm, and went
with her out of the church ..... "
This worthy Mr. Wood intended, he
afterwards told, to escort his charge to
a safe place beyond the battlements, but
a soldier, seeing a Papist maiden likely
to escape, ran her through with his
sword. "Whereupon, Mr. Wood, seeing
her gasping, took away her money,
jewels, etc., and flung her down over
the works."
Cromwell wrote an exuberant dispatch
to the Speaker of the Commons. He told
how he forbade his men to spare any
who were in arms, "and I think that
night they put to the sword about two
thousand men.'' (The next day's carnage
brought the total slain to 3,000 or 3,500.)
Some having taken refuge in St. Peter's
church steeple, Cromwell had ordered it
to be fired ; in his dispatch he gloats on
the roasting of one refugee.
" This has been a marvellous great
mercy," the blasphemer wrote. "I wish
that all honest hearts may give glory
-- " we cannot finish the diabolical
sentence.
*
On October 2, the Parliament of
England, having heard Cromwell's report,
unanimously resolved :
"That the House does approve of the
execution done at Drogheda as an
act of both justice to them and
mercy to others who may be warned
by it ; "
and ordered a Thanksgiving Day to be
kept in merry England.
By that time, Cromwell was far to
the south. Having passed through Dublin
again- and spiking the heads of Ashton
and fifteen of his murdered officers there,
as a signal of the Puritan wrath, he had
pressed on through golden Wicklow, with
a fleet escort on the sea and a cavalry
guard on the right-down to Wexford
town, which he invested by sea and
land on October 1.
It took Cromwell over a week to get
possession of this fair port. He did it
by craft. Having made a breach in the
castle wall, he opened negotiations with
the defenders, holding their leaders in
play until his own men had scaled the
castle walls, changed the flag, and turned
the guns upon the town, whereupon the
citizens thought that all was lost, and
panic began. In a word, Wexford was
won by a breach of truce.
The scenes of Drogheda were repeated.
Women and children fled to the market
place and clustered at the great stone
cross, while the slaughter was proceeding
elsewhere; but, if they thought that the
symbol of God's salvation and mercy
would quell the Puritan anger, they
discovered their mistake. Under the
papistical emblem, as Cromwellians
deemed the cross, the blood of the
innocent was spilt-women and children
were slain like sheep by the butcher.
Do they not shew in Wexford, to this
day, stones black with the blood of
those who suffered three hundred years
ago?
A military dispatch which was drawn
up five days after the fall of the city
was published for the delectation of the
Puritans of England. Was the author
Cromwell, or one of his subordinates?
Little matter : the language is his. "We
lay before this city eight days, and the
ninth day, which was the 11th of this
month, God delivered it and the strong
castle thereof into our hands . . . . . God
visited both the deceivers and the deceived
together. Of their priests (which
deceived and led them) were many slain.
Some (I heard of) came holding forth
crucifixes before them, and conjuring the
soldiers (for His sake Who saved us all)
to save their lives ; yet our soldiers . . . .
struck them dead with their idols. Many
of their priests being got together in a
church of the town . . . . were slain
together by our soldiers about their
altars."
That is the Puritan account. Let us
compare it with the report which Dr.
Nicholas French, Bishop of Ferns, later
sent to Rome :
" Before God's altar fell sacred victims,
holy priests of the Lord. Of those who
were seized outside the church, some
were scourged, some thrown into chains
and imprisoned, while others were hanged
or put to death by cruel tortures. The
blood of our noblest citizens was shed
so that it inundated the streets. There
was hardly a house that was not defiled
with carnage and filled with wailing.
"In my own palace,"-the Bishop
continues,-" a boy hardly sixteen years
of age, an amiable youth, and also my
gardener and sacristan were barbarously
butchered ; and my chaplain, whom I
had left behind me at home, was pierced
with six mortal wounds and left weltering
in his blood . . . . .
" After the destruction of the town, I
lived for five months in the woods, every
moment sought after that I might be
put to death. There my drink was milk
and water, my food a little bread; on
one occasion I did not taste food for five
whole days. I slept under the open sky,
without any shelter or covering. At
length, the wood in which I lay concealed
was surrounded by numerous
bodies of the enemy, who came to seize
me and send me in chains to England.
But, thanks to my guardian angel, I
escaped their hands, owing to the speed
and swiftness of my horse."
The historian of the Irish Martyrs,
Father Myles Ronan, writes :
" As in the case of Drogheda, only a
few names of those who died for the
Faith (in Wexford) have been handed
down to us: Father Richard Synnot,
formerly Guardian of the Franciscan
Convent ; Father John Esmond, Father
Paulinus Synnot, Father Raymond Stafford,
Father Peter Stafford, Brother
Didacus Cheevers, and Brother Joseph
Rochford, all members of the Franciscan
Convent of Wexford, and natives of the
town. Father Peter Stafford had for
fifteen years discharged the duties of a
parish priest. Brother Cheevers was
seventy years of age and blind. Father
Raymond Stafford, with crucifix in hand,
was preaching to the people and encouraging
them in the market-square,
where he was slain."
The numbers of citizens, including
women and children, massacred, are
estimated by Father Ronan at 4,000.
Seven churches in the town were pulled
down ; plate was seized and bells shipped
to England. Cromwell hated Christian
bells.
*
So once again, the Lord General had
tidings for the Parliament of England
that cheered the Puritan heart. On now
he moved, in mid-October, to New Ross.
Terror had marched ahead of him: the
town offered no resistance to his occupation.
There was sickness in the army,
and the Lord General himself was ill ;
yet the ferocity of the man kept him
alive and malignant. He sent out a
proclamation, ordering all other cities
and towns to surrender. If they opened
their gates, the lives and property of
citizens would be safe, and no questions
made about religion-with one proviso.
"Wherever the authority of Parliament
extends, the Mass shall not be tolerated."
The proclamation had some effect.
Inchiquin's garrisons in the towns of
County Cork deserted the Stuart cause
and declared for the Parliament. This
news told Cromwell that the richest
part of the south had given itself to
him, and he'd not have to fight for it.
Secondly-and this was the best news
for villainy in all that terrible time - couriers
brought in the tidings that
Owen Roe was dead.
To this day, many believe that O' Neill
died by treachery, although medical men
say that he succumbed to tetanus, set
up by a nail in his boot. At any rate,
he had sickened at Derry. Moving southward,
with intent to seek out Cromwell
and match the sword of Ireland against
the sword of hell, he had got as far
as Cloch-Uachtair, near Ballyhaise, in
the hills of Cavan. He came forth to
address his men on the hillside above the
water. A mill drowned his weakened
voice, and was stopped. The great
general uttered some words, glowing with
the nobility of his spirit, and faltered.
He died on November 6 at the Castle,
Cloch-Uachtair--cloch means castle here.
The sword of the north had snapped !
Well might the bard Carolan, in the
next generation, lament that day, with
Gaelic words and haunting sorrowful
music '.
Iongna mór sé is dóigh liom féin
Do dhuine ar vutg sab domhan a fuair comhrídh di bhéil.
Is dá bhfaghadh said ba seoide ba dheise sa ramn Eorpa,
Cia bheith beo ndiaidh Eoghain Ui Néill?

'Tis a great marvel, as I think, to anyone
who ever held converse with you; and
if they were to gain the most beautiful
jewels in Europe, who would wish to
live after Owen O'Neill?
Uch, uchón ! I pine and grieve for the
great warrior-prince of the seed of
O'Neill; the sweetest, most musical
voice, east or west, that was ever yet
heard by any.
(Bunting Collection, Ed. O'Sullivan)
To Cromwell, the death of Owen Roe
O'Neill signified that he would not meet
the one soldier who, as his dispatches
had admitted, he feared : the soldier of
Arras, the victor of Benburb. So on the
Lord General went, late in November.
Waterford resisted him, and he lost a
thousand men and abandoned some guns.
Over the high wild country to Dungarvan
he went, in a fearful storm ; but
he reached Youghal early in December,
and was received by the revolted garrison.
Just in time ! The Irish winter
had thinned the Cromwellian ranks ; but
now, with a secure sea-base, the army
was built up again. Two months were
spent in preparation for the next stage
in Cromwell's "godly thorough reformation
'' of Munster.
Contingents of O'Neill's former army
had been posted by Ormond in Kilkenny,
Clonmel and Fethard: they were all that
remained in the field in the South, to
defy the Parliament of England.
*
In December, there was a strange
scene at Clonmacnoise, in that " quiet
watered land " where--
" ... Stands St. Ciaran's city fair
And the warriors of Erin in their
famous generations
Slumber there ; "
twenty of the Bishops of Ireland gathered
at Ciaran's plain of crosses to discuss
the state of their afflicted people. Conceive
their Lordships-every man of
them in peril of such a fate as that of
Bishop Boetius MacEgan, the Franciscan
Bishop of Ross, whom the Cromwellians
were to hang, after his heroic
exhortation to the garrison of Carrigadrohid-
conceive them for three weeks
moving in the ruined holy city, saying
their Masses at altars where saints had
offered the Holy Sacrifice ; sleeping in
huts, conferring in roofless aisles .....
There, where holy Ciaran had planted
his monastery so long ago ; where scholars
had gathered the Annals and had sent
advice to Charlemagne ; a place redolent
with sacred learning and racial tradition,
the Bishops contemplated the threat of
outright destruction that overclouded all
the land.
In an address to the clergy and people
of Ireland, the hierarchy exhorted all,
for faith and fatherland, to forget past
feuds and join together in one holy cause,
to resist the new enemy. They denounced
all odious distinctions between Old Irish,
English and Scottish Royalists, and resolved
to punish any clergy who should
be found to encourage them. No security
of life, fortune or religion could be
expected from Cromwell.
This was brought to Cromwell's knowledge
at his headquarters in Youghal.
At this time, the Lord General, through
his servants, was exercising a reign of
terror in Catholic Cork. By proclamation,
Catholics had been ordered to abjure their
religion or quit the city. This is reported
by a Jesuit Father then on the mission
(quoted by Father Ronan)-
" Three cannon-shots were to be fired
as signals at stated intervals before nightfall,
and any Catholic found in the city
after the third signal was to be massacred
without mercy. Then it was that the
constancy of the citizens in the Faith
was seen. There was not even one found
in the city who would accept the impious
conditions offered, or to try to keep his
property and goods with the loss of his
faith. Before the third signal all went
forth from the city walls, the men and
women, yea, even the children and the
infirm; and it was a sight truly worthy
of Heaven to see so many thousands
abandoning their homes, so many venerable
matrons with their tender children
wandering through the fields, or overcome
with fatigue lying on the ground,
in ditches, or on the highways; so many
aged men, sons of whom had held high
offices in the State and belonged to the
nobility, with their wives and families,
wandering to and fro, knowing not where
to find a place of refuge; so many
merchants, who that morning abounded
in wealth, now without a home in which
to rest their weary limbs.
" Yet all went forth with joy to their
destruction, abandoning their houses and
goods, their revenues and property and
wealth, choosing rather to be afflicted
with the people of God on the mountaintops
and in caverns, in hunger and
thirst, in cold and nakedness, than to
enjoy momentary pleasure and temporal
prosperity with sin."
This was Cork's response to the Puritan
effort to force it to apostasy. Up Cork !
"Being very much in want of artillery,
Cromwell had the bells of the Cork
churches melted down," Father Ronan
tells us. "When remonstrated with for
the sacrilege, he replied that as gunpowder
was invented by a priest, he
thought it not amiss to turn the bells
into cannon."
When the Lord General learnt of the
hierarchy's address to the Irish people,
he wrote a lengthy reply charged with
Puritanical venom against the Catholic
religion, and sneers at the Bishops. " By
what authority," he says, "was the
Mass exercised in these places or in any
part of the Dominions of England, or
Ireland, or the Kingdom of Scotland ?
You were intruders herein . . . . Through
the troubles you made, the miseries you
brought on this nation "-mark, this is
Cromwell addressing the Bishops of Ireland
!-''through the desolations you
made in the country, did you recover
again the exercise of the Mass ? . . . . •
I shall not, when I have power, and
the Lord is pleased to bless me, suffer
the exercise of the Mass where I can
take notice of it.''
*
That was in January, 1650, from
Cromwell's headquarters at Youghal. He
turned his eyes now upon the last
strongholds in which the patriot cause
held out : his chief objective was Kilkenny,
which had been for a glorious
spell the capital of Ireland in arms.
Ormond had left Kilkenny, and had
gone to Limerick, with a plan to reorganise
the Royalist forces. He invited
the hierarchy to consult with him.
Meeting at Loughrea, the Bishops drew
up a declaration, giving conditional support
to Ormond's plans, and denouncing
Cromwell, "a rebellious and malignant
murderer,'' who designed" the final extirpation
of our natives." This was issued
on March 28, the very day on which
Kilkenny fell.
On the way, Callan and Cahir were
taken. The usual Ormondist treachery
was ready to give up Callan without
resistance but Captain MacGeoghegan
and a hundred men held a corner and
battled to the last, and gave their lives
-every man of them. MacGeoghegan' s
wife did mighty execution, too.
Fire was opened on Kilkenny on the
Feast of the Annunciation. In three
days, tie city had surrendered on terms.
The clergy were permitted, by the terms,
to leave the city with the evacuating
garrison. At that time, the Bishop of
Ossory was Dr. David Rothe, an illustrious
scholar and saintly prelate, who
had been Bishop for thirty-two years ;
he was now in his seventy-eighth year.
He was delayed in departure, and his
coach was overtaken by marauders, who
tore him out, robbed him, and cast him
into a shovel where, after three weeks,
he died.
The customary Puritan pillage and
devastation burst on St. Canice's city.
Altars were desecrated, and the cathedral
aisles turned into stables. Having thrown
down the roof, Cromwell's men "took
away five large bells, and carried off the
precious painted glass five centuries old,
which depicted the Passion, Resurrection
and Ascension of Our Lord. The Jesuit
house and chapel were destroyed."
Mark the lesson of these orgies of
destruction. Ireland has very little-hardly
any-of the glory of mediaeval
art which men admire in the old cathedrals
of other lands; not because she
never knew or shared that glory, but
because the hand of Cromwell tore it
down : the Puritan axes and fires made
fair cities ruinous.
Father Barnaby Barnewall, Commissary General of the Capuchins, escaped
from the city in disguise. It is said that
some other clergy of distinction were
less fortunate ; having remained in the
city, taking refuge in the Dominican
friary, they were betrayed, and hauled
forth to be slain.
How closely Puritanism and Atheistic
Communism are allied (if they are not,
indeed, identical) may be seen from an
episode in the market-place, which closely
resembles some seen in our own day in
Red Spain. There stood in that place a
magnificent structure of stone-an obelisk
supporting a sculptured crucifix.
Seven of Cromwell's soldiers fired musket
shots at the sacred figure, broke it, and
went to their dwellings exultant. A few
days later, it is said, six of the desecrators
perished by some strange disease.
From Kilkenny, Cromwell marched to
Carrick, where there was resistance, and
hundreds were slain before he was master
of the town. Meanwhile, his subordinate,
General Broghill, had marched up through
Muskerry, and had taken the Bishop of
Ross, Dr. Boetius MacEgan, O.F.M.,
prisoner at Macroom, where hundreds
fell, and prisoners were murdered.
" The late mercy," is Broghill's blasphemous
account of his achievement.
Dr. MacEgan, a devoted churchman
and patriot, who had studied in Louvain in
that house of St. Anthony which was the
intellectual headquarters of the Gaelic
world, already had suffered persecution.
Now he was to suffer the extreme penalty.
Broghill carried him to Carrigadrohid,
where the castle still held out. The
Bishop was promised his life if he could
exhort the garrison to surrender. Brought
before the walls, to address the defenders,
he exhorted them instead to stand fast
for God and country. By the orders of
the Cromwellian general the Bishop at
once was mutilated-his hands and feet
were cut off-he was dragged across the
soil, and hanged from a tree. His name
is among the most illustrious on the list
of the Irish martyrs. He suffered on
April 10.
Cromwell marched for Clonmel, where
he had arranged to make a junction with
Broghill.
* This town was regarded by both sides
as strategically important. Its defence
had been entrusted to the best soldier
in the patriot forces, Major-General Hugh
Duff (Aodh Dubh) O'Neill, with 1,500
men of the Ulster Army. The action
that followed was the most remarkable,
for the courage and tenacity of the Irish
army, of all the struggles against Cromwell's
overwhelming forces.
Aodh Dubh was son of Art Óg O'Neill,
and nephew of the glorious Owen Roe.
The table on this page shews his relationship to the chief figures of the House of
Niall. He was born in Spain, and, like
his uncle, combined with the military
genius of the race of the O'Neills, the
benefits of continental experience in
arms. He came to Ireland with Owen
Roe in 1642; was taken prisoner at the
battle of Clones in 1643 ; and was held
in confinement in Derry until he was
exchanged, three years later. For the
defence of Clonmel, Hugh Duff had made
good preparations. He had discovered a
treacherous plan to admit the Cromwellians
at a certain point when it should
be breached. He turned the traitors'
design to his own use.
'' He did set all men and maids to
work," says a contemporary writer quoted
by Butler, "'townsmen and soldiers, to
draw dunghills, mortar, stones and timber,
and make a long lane a man's height,
and about eighty yard's length, on both
sides up from the breach; and he caused
engines to be placed on both sides of
the lane, and two guns at the end of it,
invisible, opposite to the breach, and so
ordered all things against a storm. He
entrusted the defence of this inner
retrenchment, or lane, to a body of
volunteers, armed with swords, scythes
and pikes.
"Musket ammunition was scarce, and
to a picked body of good shots this
precious store was distributed ; they
were placed in the loop-holed houses"
which commanded this lane.
It was on April 27 that the Puritans
planted their cannon to hammer down
the walls, and the citizens heard the
psalms of the fanatics as, long before,
the Christians of Valencia heard the
drums of the beleaguering Moors. It was
not until May 10 that the artillery
had made a breach wide enough for
Cromwell to launch his storming parties.
The entry to the town proved easy,
but the Puritans had expected that. So
into Hugh Duff's trap the Puritans confidently
marched, and soon the prepared
lane was "crammed full with men,
armed with helmets, backs, breasts (i.e.
armour of steel), swords, musketoons
and pistols ; when those in the front,
seeing themselves in a pound, and that
they could make their way no further,
cried out : ' Halt ! halt ! '
" On which those entering behind at
the breath thought by these words that
the garrison were running away, and
cried out 'Advance ! advance ! ' as fast
as those before cried ' Halt ! ' halt ! '
and so advanced until they thrust forward those before them till the lane was
full and could hold no more.
"Then suddenly rushes a resolute
party of pikes and musketeers (along
the walls to the breach, and scoured off
and knocked back those entering, at
which, O'Neill's men within fell on those
in the pound with shots, pikes, scythes,
stones, and then two guns, firing at them
from the end of the pound, slaughtering
them by the middle or knees with chained
bullet, that in less than an hour's time
about a thousand men were killed there,
being atop one another."
Where was Cromwell at this moment ?
He was impatient to take the town, not
for the take of his hunger for conquest
alone, but because he had received in
January a summons from the Parliament
to hasten back to England. Scotland was
threatening, and there were still gentlemen
in England who hoped to throw off
the rule of the bigots. So the Lord
General was eager to crush the last
serious resistance in Ireland. At this
moment he sat on horseback with his
guard at the gate of the town, expecting
it to be opened by those who had entered
the breach. He heard the cannon within,
and saw Puritans expelled at the breach,
and he was "as much vexed as ever
he was since he first put on a helmet
against the king ; for such a repulse he
did not usually meet with."
He drew off. He ordered a second
assault. His foot soldiers shirked the
task. Cromwell summoned his cavalry,
and sent in dismounted troopers to the
attack; they gained a footing within the
town, and they suffered, like the first
force, under that close fire within the
lane. For hours those tenacious fellows
strove to hold their ground, but at last,
after the loss of two thousand lives, the
survivors retired, battered and bleeding.
*
Hugh Duff and his Ulstermen were
victors-for the present. Their resources,
however, were spent-their powder was
all gone. Hugh prepared to evacuate,
and arranged with the mayor that on
the morrow, when the troops were away,
in darkness and secrecy of the night, he
should open negotiations for the town's
surrender, and secure good terms. This
was done with as many as were living
and able to march, of his 1,500 men,
O'Neill slipped through the night and
the Puritan sentries, and made away on
the high road to Limerick. Then the
mayor, Mr. White, went to Cromwell,
offering to surrender the town, if lives
and property of the citizens were secured.
The Lord General was all too pleased
to get the town on these terms, and
signed the paper of terms agreed upon;
after which, as a contemporary account
tells -
"Cromwell asked him if Hugh O'Neill
knew of his coming out. To which he
answered h e did not; for that he was
gone two hours after night fell with all
his men.
" At which, Cromwell stared and
frowned at him, and said: 'You knave,
have you served me so, and did not
tell me so before ? '
" To which the mayor replied, if his
Excellency had demanded the question
he would tell him. Then he asked him
what that Duff O'Neill was ; to which
the mayor answered that he was an
over-sea soldier, born in Spain ; on which
Cromwell said, 'God damn you, and
your over-sea ! ' and desired the mayor
to give the paper back again. To which
the other answered that he hoped his
Excellency would not break his conditions
or take them from him, which
was not the repute his Excellency had,
but to perform whatever he had promised.
"On which Cromwell was somewhat
calm, but said in a fury, ' By God above,
he would follow that Hugh Duff O'Neill
wheresoever he went."'
This, however, the Lord General did
not perform, for he left Ireland a few
days later for England, after committing
the rest of the Irish campaign to his
son-in-law Ireton. The terms signed were
kept in the main, but at least two priests
suffered the Puritan fury. Father James
O'Reilly, O.P., " a learned theologian,
eloquent preacher and famous poet,"
who had been sent from Waterford to
Clonmel a short time before "to instruct
the youth in polite literature and
Christian doctrine " was slaughtered;
and Father Myles Magrath, O.P., taken
while administering Holy Communion
to a dying man, was condemned to be
hanged, and was executed in the public
square, exhorting the spectators, from
the scaffold, "to continue true to the
Faith."
Moreover, Puritan forces sent in pursuit
of O'Neill's retreating column, overtook
the women and children and slew
zoo of them.
Waterford, Limerick and Galway remained
in Irish hands after Cromwell's
departure; but his ferocious campaign
had broken what the disunited nation
had of strength to resist. At Drogheda,
Wexford, Callan, Kilkenny, Clonmel - every
scene of action in Cromwell's
campaign-the heroism of the defenders
was crippled in greater or less degree
by treachery: that is, by the double-dealing
of the Ormondists who were
reluctant to throw in their lot to the
full with the patriotic cause, and tried
to make terms with the English enemy
behind the backs of the patriot leaders.
It probably was in this time that a
proverbial verse was made that summed
up forever the folly of making terms,
short of victory, with the alien.
Make no compact with the Gall ;
If you do, 'twill be your fall :
To undo you, each and all -
That's the compact of the Gall.
*
Our purpose, to describe the career of
Cromwell in Ireland, therefore, is completed
without following the campaign
in which Ireton performed the last of
the design of the Adventurers and the
Commonwealth Parliament. We need
not describe the defence of Limerick,
in the following year, by Hugh Duff,
and the betrayal of that city by a treacherous
mayor. O'Neill was taken prisoner
and sent over to London, where he was.
condemned to be hanged along with
Colonel Alexander MacDonnell, later earl
of Antrim,-but the two soldiers of
Ireland were reprieved. Hugh was sent
away to the king of Spain, and it is
stated that Cromwell wrote to the king,
recommending O'Neill to him "for a
good soldier.'' What lay behind this
curious transaction-for Cromwell was
incapable of a chivalrous act-we can
but guess. Later, when Earl Hugh's sons
were dead, Hugh Duff claimed the
earldom of Tyrone, and was recognised
in Spain as earl. He met his death in
battle in Portugal.
The war petered out two years after
Cromwell's departure. By this time,
famine, fire and sword had wrought such
desolation as was not seen again in any
European land until our own apocalyptic
times, where the Red Terror has reigned.
Famine had been produced deliberately.
The lists of munitions served out to the
Cromwellian troops include scythes, which
were to be used for the destruction of
growing crops. The accepted statistics
tell us that, of a population of 1,466,000
at the outset of Cromwell's war, only
850,000 remained alive at the end.
Lecky' s pen picture of Ireland after
Cromwell may be cited : " A third part
of the population had been thus blotted
out, and Petty tells us that according to
some calculations the number of the
victims was much greater. Human food
had been so successfully destroyed that
Ireland, which had been one of the
great pasture countries of Europe, was
obliged to import cattle from Wales for
consumption in Dublin . . . . In some
districts the traveller rode twenty or
thirty miles without seeing one trace of
human life and fierce wolves-rendered
doubly savage by feeding on human
flesh-multiplied with startling rapidity
through the deserted land, and might
be seen prowling in numbers within a
few miles of Dublin . . . . Slave-dealers
were let loose upon the land, and many
hundreds of destitute or vagrant boys
and young women were torn away from
their country, shipped to Barbados, and
sold for terms of years to the planters."
Let us quote Dubhaltach Mac
Firbhisigh, the genealogist-who was to
end - is long life of scholarship at the
hand of a Cromwellian murderer,-in a
passage which expresses the anguish of
the ancient race :
" Ní fhuil acgt treas nach bhfaictear ballada aolta ‘na seasamh is na háitibh do tógbhadh mile leith, nó dhá mhíle, trí mhíle, agus níos mó do bhliadnuibh ó shoin…”
" It is only a short time that limed
walls are no longer seen standing in the
places that were built a thousand and
a half, or two thousand, three thousand,
and more years ago. It is no wonder
that they should not be standing now,
since in a shorter period than that the
earth covers works, once they are broken
down or fall by themselves through age.
'' To prove that, I myself have seen
within sixteen years high castles, all
limed, built of mortared stone, and today,
when they have fallen, nothing of them
remains but a moat of earth, and a
person ignorant of the place would
scarcely recognise that buildings had
existed there at all."
Yet more expressive of the soul of
the Gael at that time is the song made
for Colonel John O'Dwyer, who commanded
forces in Tipperary and Waterford,
and afterwards went into exile,
leaving the glen of Aherlow forever :
the air is a dead march that throbs with
sorrow, and the words recall all that
lovely life of woodland and farmland
that haunt the memory of those who
know it, and most of all, the exile -

‘S ar mh’éirghe do mar maidin,
Grian a’ tsamhraodh ‘taithneamh,
Chuala mé an uaill dá casadh
Agus ceol binn na néan…


Rising early in the morning, when the
summer sun was shining, I heard the
horn a-winding, and the sweet song
of birds;
Hares and badgers running; long-beaked
woodcock calling, echoes loudly ringing,
and the strong sound of guns;
The red fox rockward racing; the hunters
crying after ; and women on the
roadway lamenting their lost fowl ;
But now the woods are falling, and seaward
we must journey: for, Sean
O'Dwyer a' Gleanna, you have lost
your land!
In August, 1652, the Parliament of
the Commonwealth passed an Act for
Ireland which is known as the Cromwellian
Settlement. This was a general
-confiscation and distribution of plunder,
which blotted out the very lineaments of
old Ireland. Let us read Edmund Curtis's
summary of that disastrous settlement.
"The arrears of pay of the Cromwellian
army and the claims of the
Adventurers . . . . were met by confiscation.
Ireland had to pay for its
own conquest, and 'was the great capital
out of which the Cromwellian Government
paid all debts, rewarded all services,
and performed all acts of bounty.'
" Ireland was divided into two parts,
viz., Clare and Connacht which alone
were to be left to Irish gentry and land
Owners, and the rest, which was confiscated
in order to meet the claims of
the Adventurers and of the soldiers
and officers. The Government took over
also the towns, and the property of
the Church."
Never did Ireland recover wholly what
thus was lost by the Curse of Cromwell.
Perhaps, the greatest of all English
treacheries to Ireland was the refusal of
Charles II, after the restoration of the
monarchy, to undo the Cromwellian
Settlement. As for Cromwell, after leaving
Ireland, he became Lord Protector,
or military dictator and generalissimo,
of his own country, and ruled by martial
law, without right, justice or mercy.
He '' left nothing behind him-no public
works, no new system of law, no better
tenure of land, no clearer conception of
justice,"-so writes General Sir William
Butler in his Oliver Cromwell in Ireland,
a valuable essay on which we have
drawn with considerable freedom.
So well might England rue the Curse
of Cromwell, too. "Nothing cried at
his funeral," wrote Evelyn, "but the
dogs.''

