Lingua gloriosa Hiberniae
Blessed Pope Pius X.
" It would be an ill day for the country
if they, the men of the rising generation,
willingly and deliberately forfeited the ideal
of the native culture-the ideal of the revival
of the Irish tongue-for an alien culture.
An Coarba Phadraig. Extract
from first public address as
Primate-Designate given at An
Uaimh, 12 June, 1946.
" Beidh an Ghaedhilg fá mheas fós."
Father O'Molloy, Rome, 1676.
When, some forty years after
the battle of Clontarf, Edward
the Confessor gave his country
its first building of Norman architecture,
he could not have known that Westminster
Abbey was to become the Pantheon
of England. Irishmen who passed
through its portals since must have
" cast a cold eye " on a certain wooden
armchair that is housed there. Its
timbers are scarred as if some mischievous
Eton -Joy of old had used his pocketknife
on it with abandon. In a shallow
recess underneath the seat, a rude block
of red sandstone is inserted-the alleged
Lia Fáil. It is said that a cloth of gold
is thrown over the chair on the momentous
occasions on which royalty reposes
thereon ; for this is the coronation chair
of England's kings. Hereon sat Norman,
Plantagenet, Tudor, Stuart and Hanoverian
claiming a kingship over Ireland
to which God or man never appointed
them. Truly, a travesty of a throne !
To say that this chair is the seat of all
the trouble that has bedevilled relations
between two neighbouring countries for
seven centuries is not an oversimplification
of history. (The treatment by the
historian of that relationship has seldom
been characterised by objectivity.)
Whether it was the king or his councillor
who endeavoured to enforce the foreign
claim matters little; the attempt constitutes
the history of Ireland since 1169.
Strongbow may have been more resolute
in its attempted realisation than Henry
II ; Cromwell, more than Henry VIII ;
Cecil, more than Elizabeth ; and the
great-nephew of Henry Tudor's henchman
(the regicide who deprived his own
king and country of a royal head) more
fearfully brutal than any of them at
implementation. But the Ireland of
history adhered with dogged determination
to a concept which sustained it
during the ensuing struggle. That concept
embraced four freedoms-loyalty to
the Faith, to history (cuimhne a sinnsear),
to the ideal of independence, and to the
native language. Whether passive or
active in resistance, Ireland always held
these four loyal ties in her heart.
Since 1169, the whole impact of world
history on Ireland was a repercussion of
its impingement on England. Feudalism
had a long twilight and, broadly speaking,
it fell on Europe about the twelfth
century. In the sixteenth century, Germany
was being convulsed by an Augustinian
monk. In the late eighteenth
century, England was discovering the
value of coal and iron. They were three
developments widely separated in time
and in nature but combining to cause
universal change-Nationalism, " The
Reformation," and the Industrial Revolution.
They were European developments
but they had an almost fatal effect on
the culture of an isolated island on the
continental fringe-Ireland. This country
remained Irish-speaking after the Norman
invasion (An Ceitinneach was of that
descent), and later settlers also adopted
the Irish tongue but, as the centuries
passed, anglicisation made steady progress
until it was almost supreme at the opening
of the present century.
The Fall of Feudalism
The writing was on the wall for feudalism
in Europe about the period of the
Norman invasion of Ireland. Baron and
vassal were becoming subject to the
Throne under which a social order of
national consciousness was beginning to
develop. The usurper, Brian Mac Cinneide,
had already attempted to weld a
land of warring chiefs into a national
unit in this country. Had Brian, his
son, or his grandson not fallen at Clontarf
one or other might have accomplished the
task and perhaps justified the robbery
from Malachy of his title to be Ard Rí.
But, after the triple loss at Clontarf,
there was none to whom the chiefs
would yield a common allegiance. Had
one been found to unite the whole land
it might have ushered in centuries of
national unity.
The divided land of Ireland was ideal
for the advent of independent barons
who were finding the changing order in
Europe not to their liking; nor was
King Henry II of England loath to give
his blessing to Strongbow, Fitz Gilbert de
Clare, Fitz Henry and Fitz Stephen, who
came with naked swords in mailed fist
to carve their fortune. Henry was well
rid of their turbulence at home and he
would keep his eye on them abroad so
that they would give him at least a
nominal allegiance. The Norman-French
culture of these adventurers would eventually
have been merged in the virile
Gaelic of their environment and no great
harm would have been done to the Irish
way of life. (Normandy eventually gave
France some of the best type of Frenchman.)
Unfortunately, because of the
national disunity, they became the spearhead
of the main body of the invaders
who themselves persistently attempted to
weld this country into a unit as the realm
of a foreign overlord and with a foreign
culture. The struggle for the hegemony
of the English language in Ireland had
begun.
The New Religion
The Augustinian monk who started a
crusade to remedy alleged abuses started
something over whose direction and
development he had long since lost control
before the forces he unleashed caused
chaos. (Following on came Calvin whose
avowed object was to establish a new
church.) So, too, did King Henry VIII
of England, the disobedient Catholic
king, start on a course, like the disobedient
Catholic priest, whose tortuous
ways and meanderings blinded them to
the Ultimate. The Norman spearhead
had long since expanded into the English
garrison whose aim was to possess the
land of Ireland and enjoy it under the
patron1ge of an English king. Following
the blind way of the New Religion, the
occupants of the English throne led
their people into spiritual blindness. A
new element had entered into the conflict
between Ireland and England. The war
of Gael against Gall underwent a complete
change consequent on the religious
rivalries brought about by the New
Religion. The basis of the whole Irish
tradition was Catholic. This Faith was
persecuted and mocked at for the reason
that the language with which it was
entwined was persecuted and mocked at,
both being obstacles to national subjugation
and the robbery of national
possessions. The " Reformation " made
possible the Penal Laws of which code
Dr. Devane, author of Isle of Destiny,
wrote: "I will make two statements.
First, that the Penal Laws were the
most terrible instruments of oppression
ever wielded by one Christian people
against another. Second, that they were
the most unjust instruments of oppression
ever wielded by one Christian people
against another.'' And Dr. Sigerson
wrote : "For a time, anti-Christ ruled in
Ireland. Cromwellian cruelty looks mild,
and the pagan persecution of the early
Christians almost human when compared
with the Penal Code." These
" terrible " and " unjust instruments of
oppression" were new weapons used in
the onslaught against the Irish language.
The Industrial Revolution
The original spearhead of the invader
had secured a footing in 1169. Because
King Brian had left an unfinished task
long before, the invader had extended
and enlarged his conquest. His superior
weapons helped him in battle against
the Irish, and the erection of stone castle
and keep (something new in an Irish
landscape) consolidated his victories.
By the eighteenth century his successors
had secured a precarious control over
the whole island. The country had been
deprived of political and economic freedom
; but, despite the continuous attack
on the cultural freedom of the country
and the policy of constant pressure to
make the people conform to the alien
culture, Gaelic remained the speech of
three-quarters of the population down
to the beginning of the eighteenth
century.
The coming of the Industrial Revolution
gave an impetus to anglicisation
which eventually might have proved
fatal to any hope of the language revival
had the Gaelic League not been established
when it was. Ireland was a
pastoral country and what there was of
commerce and economic life was controlled
by the English invaders. Their
language being already identified with
government and politics (even national
politics) became also the language of the
new industrial development.
(Language is a thing of growth. The
cave-man by his camp fire presided at
the birth-cries of human speech. It was
born when he scraped rude pictures on
a rock to explain his meaning and distinguished
the symbols by speech-sounds.
He made himself articulate by sound and
sigh to express the thrill or hazard of the
hunt and chase. And he grunted and
growled in the savage rhythm of some
primitive dance to communicate his
emotions. These speech-sounds evolved
during the course of centuries as their
application to the times required until
they culminated in the medium of language
as we know it.)
The Irish language, virile and robust
in the pastoral age was sufficient for the
requirements of the simpler life ; but
it was unprepared for the more complex
life of the industrial age over which the
Gael had no control. The speech-moulds
of the language broke under the
pressure.
Eclipse
Pondering on might-have-beens is idle
speculation. Ireland, nonetheless, might
be Gaelic today if it were not for Clontarf.
The dissatisfied Normans, restless
in their world of discarded feudalism,
would have been repelled if the country
had been united. And, if one of Brian's
house had survived a battle fought a
century-and-a-half earlier, he would have
laid the foundation of that unity. Then
Henry II and his roving barons might
have decided that launching their pirate
ships westward was but foolhardy enterprise.
Again, Protestantism would not have
gained its eventual foothold in Ireland.
Had the Norman advance (which it is
suggested would have been repulsed) been
followed by successive waves of invasion
(which, more or less, did successfully
occur), they would have beaten vainly
against the shore of a united country.
Finally, the Ireland which might(and
should) have emerged after Clontarf - with
its economy under native control
-would have adapted itself to the impact
of the Industrial Revolution (which was
bound to come in any case) without
adverse effect on the national culture.
In 1014, the Norse were the vanquished,
but the Irish were not the victorious.
For, only forty years afterwards, a
shrine was already being prepared for
the seat of the trouble. Kinsale was
eclipsed by Clontarf !
The Interregnum
Dawn crept with the seventeenth century
into the sky over Ireland revealing
the huddle of habitations at the head of
the sea-steep, winding streets frowned
on by the ramparts of the fort. That
dawn was the herald of a new world.
The civilisation that had been was
overthrown. It was a high price to
pay for the rejection of O'Donnell's advice
or for the chivalry of O'Neill, or for the
native treachery alleged to have been
afoot-or was the Divine displeasure incurred
? Wherever one may seek the
cause, the effect is easily found. It was
doom. Kinsale was lost.
Now began the hiatus in history constituting
the dead years of the hidden
nation. The reign of a mongrel and
illegitimate order commenced. The Ireland
of history was in helotage to strangers.
Anglo-Ireland was born.
There were men who, knowing that
Gaeldom was broken, determined that
its story would live. They would hand
down to posterity a record of the deeds
of their fathers so that the sons would
never forget. For, despair was in the
forgetting and hope in the remembering.
Inspired to bequeath "Annala Riochta
Eireann" to his people, Micheal Ó
Cieirigh gathered to the task three
others: Fearfeasa Ó Maolchonaire,.
Cucoighriche Ó Cleirigh and Cucoighriche
Ó Duibhgeannain. And Seathrun
Ceitinn compiled " Forus Feasa ar
Eirinn" in a refuge in the Glen of Aherlow.
The indestructible Gael was already
looking to another dawn what
time Tadhg O Cianain was writing his
chronicle of the Wild Geese of the North
in the sanctuary of Rome.
A confused and involved era began
in Ireland. The national continuity had
been broken. The attempt was made to
wrench a heritage out of human minds.
The effort was made to alter the philosophy
of a people. The plot was
hatched to make a nation forget more
completely with each passing generation
the significance of its origin. And the
memory of the lost world was gradually
to recede into the recollection of a dream
grown dim.
Now, the material body of the country
was ruled by the foreigner who made
the laws, but the soul of the nation was
nourished by the poets who made the
songs:
Ni hí an Eire seo, an Eire a bhí in
allód ann
Acht Eire lucht Beurla agus beadaoicht
Gall
Eire gan éifeacht, agus is anró fhann,
Eire gan Ghaedhilg, agus is searbh leo
rann.
In this age ballad and poem were
made to remind the people of the past
and to bewail the present. They knew
that they were the people of the real
lawful Ireland, the ancestral Ireland,
the Gaelic Ireland, the disputed Ireland,
-above all the Catholic Ireland. Contemporary
events may have influenced
their immediate aims but their ultimate
ideal was the re-establishment of the
old order.
But the calculated planning of the
destroyer was bound to have effect.
Native lord, prelate and scholar began to
tolerate what they could not change, and
a century after Kinsale many of the
higher classes had adopted English speech.
At the end of another century Irish
was still the spoken tongue with some
three-millions of the population but the
drift from the language now became
noticeable with the middle-classes.
It could not have been otherwise.
The people had to depend on leaders
who were becoming anglicised, who were
not of native stock, whose national
vision was obscured, or who had turned
to the language of the herrenvolk.
O'Connell would have sacrificed the
language to raise the nation from its
knees. " I can witness without a sigh
the gradual disuse of Irish," and, " I
am sufficiently utilitarian not to regret
its abandonment " are statements alleged
to have been made by him which we
would regard as national heresy coming
from one of our leaders today. A great
mind ventilating paltry thought !
Davis could write that our nationality
must not be Celtic ; it must not be
Saxon ; it must be Irish. His early
death may have prevented him outliving
such liberalism. An older Davis might
have recognised the voice of Ireland in
the voice of her poets who (as somebody
said) bitterly wrote of the " Clan London"
and " the foreign gang who had dared to
call Ireland their own." A Davis nearer to
the heart of Ireland might have written
that our nationality is Gaelic ; that " the
placid strength of the Sassenach '' and
the "marshalling insight of the Norman"
could but act as ingredients to leaven
" the cloudy and lightning genius of the
Gael." Comparison may be invidious,
but it must be said that a misguided
sense of tolerance and diplomacy or a
concession to the desire for unity has
accorded the romantic Davis centenary
honours eclipsing those accorded to
Micheal O Cleirigh and his fellow-scribes.
The "Annala Riochta Eireann" are immeasurably
more precious to Ireland
than all the editions of all the eleven-thousand
weekly copies of " The Nation."
Small blame that with such leaders (and
God be thanked that they were there in
those dead years) the "nation of crawling
slaves'' hung the '' bata scór ''
about the necks of their children and had
them whipped in school for every notch
in the tally which indicated a lapse into
Gaelic speech ! (This instrument was
usually a sally-stick shaped in rectangular
form. It was six or seven inches in
length.) In the struggle to regain something
of the material heritage of which
they had been robbed, the people were
compelled to turn to English. It was the
language associated with government and
industry, with authority and wealth.
They became more apathetic towards
the Irish language, as it militated against
their material success, for they wanted
their children to " spake English and be
dacent." The first census of Irish
speakers was taken in l851. The returns
showed that twenty-three per cent. of
the population spoke Irish. In the year
1891, only eight persons in every thousand
of the population were unable to
speak English. The number in every
thousand who were unable to speak
Irish was 855. For now the peasantry
had turned to the language of the conqueror.
-Despite the blows which were struck
at the language in the era of Anglo-Ireland,
it was not until the nineteenth
century that the foreign tongue held
complete sway. (Irish never perished
on the western seaboard or in isolated
areas in the north and south of the
country.) The Act of Union, the Great
Famine and Whately's scheme of
primary education were responsible for
what was almost its final destruction.
Anglo-Ireland was in its zenith when
the Union was passed ending " that
noisy side-show so bizarre in its lineaments
and so tragi-comic in its fate."
Dublin was in its Augustan Age (sic).
The soil of Ireland was polluted by an
alien horde, Barringtons and Norburys,
Sirrs and Swans, while the historic
nation was delivered to the pitch-cap
and the torture at their word. My lords
Castlereagh and Fitzgibbon, as precious
a brace of blackguards as ever sat in a
sedan chair, planned the final rape of the
race which was to be deprived of political,
economic and cultural freedom. Sham
squires and corrupt judges lived in the
streets and squares where the still standing
so-called ' Georgian ' mausoleums are
all they builded well.
As a boy of sixteen years of age,
Father Thomas Burke, the Dominican
preacher, witnessed the effects of the
famine in his native Galway. " I have
seen," he said, " strong men lie down
in the streets . . . '' And, referring to
other things he had seen, he continues:
" If I were to live a thousand years,
never could I banish from my memory
or shut them out from my eyes-no, nor
their dire effects." Mitchel wrote :
"God indeed sent the potato blight but
England made the famine." And, at
one tragic happening, hadn't the English
queen of the day the blistering impertinence
to send the sum of £5 for
relief ? After the famine, emigration increased.
This had the effect of discouraging
the use of Irish. "What good
is Irish for children going to England
or America?" asked the old people, and
the young echoed the sentiment.
Whately was an English divine. He
was given the task of editing the text
books for the " national " schools. A
Presbyterian Minister, a fellow-countryman
of Scott, submitted the novelist's
lines on patriotism, but Whately vetoed
the suggestion and substituted this
jingle :
I thank the goodness and the grace
That on my birth have smiled,
And made me in these Christian days,
A happy English child.
This verse, in its application to Ireland,
is an historical joke.
It may be argued that, during these
dead years, Ireland gave birth to men

Ni mucfar choidhche, le congnamh De

whose genius enriched the English tongue
itself. If Swift be remembered, it will
be, not as the satirist, but as one who
advised, at second-hand, the burning of
everything English but her coal; Burke,
not as the political publicist, but as a
man who defended Ireland ; Grattan,
not as the orator, but as one who strove
to avert the Union ; Goldsmith, not as
the author of the " Vicar of Wakefield "
but as the nostalgic exile; Tone, not for
his autobiography in English but for his
efforts to break the English connection.
And there was Mitchel, writer of the
" Jail Journal " but whose memory will
live be cause he rotted in a prison hulk
for the hidden Ireland !
As for the majority of the remainder
born in Ireland who enriched the English
language by their genius, they made no
secret of the fact that their Irish birth
meant little to them. " When I say that I
am an Irishman, I mean that I was born
in Ireland and that my native language
is the English of Swift .... my extraction
is the extraction of most Englishmen:
that is, I have no trace in me
of the commercially imported North
Spanish strain that passes for aboriginal
Irish. I am a genuine Irishman of the
Danish, Norman, Cromwellian and (of
course) Scotch invasion." The quotation
is from G. B. Shaw.
Irish speakers were now living in
isolated pockets of the country. They
were congregated on the western seaboard
(Clare, Kerry, Sligo, Galway, Mayo
and Donegal) ; in areas in the northern,
counties (Derry, Antrim, Armagh, Cavan
and Tyrone) ; on the south coast (Cork
and Waterford) ; and in parts of Leitrim
Louth, Meath, Monaghan and Kilkenny.
These reservations came to be known as
Gaeltachta-surviving remnants of that
Gaeldom that had been broken three
centuries before.
Came the cardinal date of 1893.
A Second Spring
In the beginning of this century horse-trams
clopped past the doors of
"national" schools in Dublin. In the
classrooms pupils were being told by the
teacher that Wellington won Waterloo
helped by "The Provost and College of
the Bless ed Mary of Eton near Windsor,''
though this proper legal description was
discreetly omitted. The exploits of a
hero of their own race were not seriously
talked of by the teachers to their pupils
except to refer to him as a figure of fun,
a grotesque giant who performed incredulous
feats of prowess and whose
name was distorted and used as a bogey
to frighten the refractory in the kindergarten.
The warrior Fionn Mac Cumhail
was at a distinct discount in the waning
era of Anglo-Ireland as were all the
classic tales and sagas- De-Scealta, An
Ruadhraiocht and An Fhiannuidhfocht.
The language was dead and the national
consciousness was dulled. Peter Maurin
writes :
When the Irish were Irish a thousand
years ago,
The Irish were scholars.
And when the Irish were scholars
The Irish were Greek scholars.
And when the Irish were Greek scholars
The Irish spoke Greek as well as Irish.
And when the Irish spoke Greek as well
as Irish
Greek was Irish to the Irish.
Greek was Irish to the Irish a thousand
years ago:
And now Irish is Greek to the Irish.
As the horses clopped past the doors
of Irish schools in Dublin in 1900, the
horses knew as much Irish as the pupils
in the classrooms within. The Irish
language which had been spoken for a
thousand years by their forefathers who
had been cradled in Ireland back to prehistory
was Greek to their descendants.
It was much the same throughout the
land except in the isolated regions in
which Irish had survived. Anglo-Ireland
had done its work so well throughout
the dead years that schoolboys in urban
areas were not aware that any language
other than English had ever been spoken
in Ireland. (Words like "usquebaugh,"
" shanty " and " galore " were on the
lips of people who had no notion of their
linguistic derivation.) The trams clamped
past the schools and the teachers
" nationalized " their pupils, but, above
the din some few heard and hearkened
to a voice that was crying from the
wilderness of the Decies-the voice of
Authentic Ireland:
Ar grádh do anamanna bhúr marbh
ná claoinidh uainn croidhthe na leanbh
n-óg, acht scaoilidh cughainn ón scoil
iad go gaedhealach grinnghasta mar
is dual do shioltach shean-Ghaedheal.
In his book, " Fenian Memories," Dr.
Mark F. Ryan makes reference to the
Ireland of 1798 in which occurred the
" Races of Castlebar ! " " At that time,"
writes the doctor, " the English soldiery
were billeted on the people. One of
them was billeted in my grandmother's
house. When he was lying asleep she
said to her husband: " Ta se 'na chodladh
agus níl go leór Béarla san teach
le na chúiseacht." " He is asleep now
and there is not sufficient English in
the house to awaken him ! "
A century later, in the year 1900,
Ireland was in national slumber. There
was, however, sufficient Irish left in the
country to awaken her. In future years
when historians are seeking an answer
to the question, " What, (under God,)
saved this land from national extinction "
they will find the answer, perhaps, in
two words-the language. For Irishmen
would never have continued the
struggle if the language of the Fianna
had died. ' The man called Pearse '
was but one of many, but he epitomised
in himself the philosophy of all the
generations as he crystallized their common
ideal into one immortal phrase :
" Not merely free but Gaelic as well,
not Gaelic merely but free as well."
The withering blasts that tore for
centuries at the Gaelic roots of Ireland
never destroyed these roots-they were
for ever watered with blood.
Anglo-Ireland was in death throes in
1919 when An Dail Eireann declared:
" De bhrigh gur dual do mhuintir na
hEireann bheith na saor náisiún ... "
The rest is known to every Irish child.
A galaxy of names blazed across the
opening of the new century: Douglas
Hyde, Eoin MacNeill, Dr. O'Hickey,
Eugene O'Growney, Dr.Henebry, Peadar
Ua Laoghaire, Dr. Dinneen, Padraic
O Conaire, Torna, Micheal Breathnach,
Padraic Pearse, Fr. MacKenna, An
Seabhac, An Fear Mor. There were many
others.
Three hundred years had passed. The
Chiefs of the North were a legend. But
future generations will read with pride
the words that now proclaimed the
resurrection of the race : '' In you we
greet the successor of our rightful princes
and in your accession to office, we hail
the closing of the breach that has existed
since the undoing of our nation
at Kinsale."
The bleak and barren winter of national
discontent had passed. The roots of
the Hidden Ireland had their first fine
flowering since Tadhg an tSleibhe had
passed over the hills to history. And,
if men turn in their graves, one stirred
under his ornate tomb in the dim-lit
quiet aisle in the south transept of
St. Patrick's Cathedral where beneath
his recumbent effigy in white marble
lies Richard Whately, "Archbishop of
Dublin."And children sang :
Gráinne Mhaol is a lucht ar gárda,
Anois ar theacht an tsamhraidh.
Anglo-Ireland was dead !
Advocatus Diaboli
The Irish are accused of lacking a
sense of realism. The tendency is to
hark back to "old unhappy far-off
things and battles long ago." Old wrongs
are recalled too quickly; bitter memories
are revived. The Irish do not live in
the present but in their yesteryears.
Such are the parrot-cries of critics.
Irishmen had to exist as helots in
their own land and see "the very tombs
of her kings in the keeping of a band of
nondescript aliens." Any nation whose
continuity becomes broken must cherish
a proper regard for the past whence
comes the inspiration for the future.
T. M. Kettle wrote:
We keep the past for pride
No deepest peace shall strike our poets
dumb:
No rawest squad of all Death's Volunteers
No rudest man who died
To tear your flag down in the bitter years
But shall have praise and three times
thrice again
The revival of a dead "patois" in
modern life is an example of the national
failing. If such an attempt were made
anywhere else it would be a matter for
congratulation. Consequently, it is considered
admirable of the Mexican Government
that they are actively engaged in
preserving Aztec languages. When the
Irishman (in the words of Sir Samuel
Ferguson) :
aspires
To link his present with his country's
past
And live anew in knowledge of his sires,
he is unrealistic.
Political slavery is the cause of many
evils but not of the most terrible misfortunes.
Political slavery is only
temporary and may be remedied, but
moral slavery is death itself, or, as.
Gioberti puts it : " One of these desperate
attacks of lethargy and agony from
which mankind cannot be cured save
by some extraordinary force of nature,
or, we might say, a miracle." And this
moral slavery consists in imitating foreign
languages, customs and sentiments. It
consists, in fact, in the absolute loss of
national spirit, and Gioberti said that
the national character of a people is
its essence, its soul and its life. " Woe
to the nation which has lost its national
genius, for this means losing its own
being and the consciousness of itself.”
(Giovanni Gentile).
The revival gave rise to a spate of
polemics. The rot of anglicisation made
the advocatus diaboli wax eloquent.
The revival was a mad dream ; the trend
was toward a world-comity of nations ;
the country was too small for a distinctive
language ; it was useless for the economic
exiles ; and the language of world
commerce was English.
A world commonwealth is a pious
hope. If it materialises, language won't
isolate Ireland from its orbit. It is
presumed that France and Spain engage
in commerce internationally. Belgium
(same size as Munster) in proximity to
great countries retains her own languages.
Emigration from Ireland may not be
perpetual, and some of the population
will remain at home.
The scholars aided the attack. Gaelic
contained in itself the seeds of its decay
and was inherently defective. It was
archaic and deficient in modern requirements.
Its inflections were cumbersome;
its spelling lacked standardisation ;
it had no literature of merit ; and its
dialects made confusion worse confounded.
The dismal litany concluded by begging
the question with the dogmatic peroration
: " Irish will never become the
spoken language."
One of the oldest group of languages
is the Celtic. Its dialects are, Gaelic,
Welsh Breton and Gaulish. The chief
dialect, Gaelic, was suppressed and stunted
in evolution and natural development
which "threw Irish culture some
hundred years out of the world's course."
In the accepted sense of the word, there.
are no dialects in Gaelic, the only
difference being stress of accent.
But there are dialects in England, Italy,
Germany, Flanders and Norway. Tomas
O Criomhthain wrote a book describing
the " neolithic " civilisation of his
native Blaskets. Any man from the
four provinces who knows his native
language can understand and admire
the clarity and detail of this southwestern
fisherman's classic in the Munster
'dialect.'
Queen Elizabeth of England, it is
told, suggested to Lord Burleigh that
a professorship of Irish would be appropriate to her college of Trinity at
Dublin. Burleigh was ignorant of Irish.
That did not prevent his reply: "what,"
he asked, '' encourage a language more
nearly allied to canine barking than to
the articulation human !" Her curiosity
aroused. the queen asked to hear a
specimen of this strange speech. The
following sentence was pronounced rapidly
for her enlightenment : " D'ith
damh cubh ubh amh." It may be a
pretty conceit to imagine that the queen
(who was not naive) might have remarked
in her own robust tongue ; " Ye cattle
in our realm of Irelande are squeamish
in their bellies, God wot ! "
The less exalted critic after delivering
himself of a string of cliches uncoiled
to bind the idealist with verbal fetters,
generally concludes : " But I would like
to know Irish myself ! " Why ?
The revival of Irish needs every ounce
of enthusiasm of every element in the
country. Co-ordinated national endeavour
is essential. The barriers that obstruct
progress must be removed. The
most difficult task that has been demanded
of Irishmen since the invaders came
has been given to this generation of
Irishmen. It is not a task that may be
toyed with.
The work of revival was hampered by
the reaction after the struggle for political
independence ; by the disillusion
consequent on events in 1922; by lack
of a Gaelic daily newspaper, and by inopportune
interference with the language
itself. Today, there are no obstacles
to a further progress that can not be
overcome.
A false notion of the practical inspires
many who regard the revival as quixotic
idealism. Ireland is situated between the
two great centres of the English-speaking
world. Anglicisation from the west may
finish the work of anglicisation from the
east. If the language passes from among
the people, much else will irrevocably
pass away. Our separate contribution
to civilisation will be denied to European
Christendom.
The Schools
Drab and dilapidated, it stands aloof
in an unkempt patch of ground. It was
built on the cheapest and simplest plan.
The whitewashed walls are green with
fungi, the windows dirty, the doors
rotting for want of a coat of paint. The
interior is no less depressing. The walls
are cracked, the floor is ingrained with
grit, and antiquated appointments and
rickety furniture complete the dismal
whole. Often as not, it is riddled with
the mice who feed on the luncheon-crumbs
of departed pupils. It is, of
course, the national school.
Pupils who attend such schools leave
with a smattering of broken Gaelic
which is a doubtful asset to fortify them
against the life to which many are condemned-
a bothy in Scotland, a mine in
Wales, or a factory in England.
The child, whether he be from rural
area or urban slum is obliged by economic
necessity to leave school when he becomes
independent of the School Attendance
Act. If forced into economic exile
it is ludicrous to expect him to retain
interest in the Irish language. If he
remains at home to be exploited by the
social order, he will consign the language
to the limbo wherein lie buried all the
unrealities of childhood. Some who receive
no formal education other than
that of the primary school become
fluent speakers of Irish. The devoted
teacher is to be thanked.
Results from residential schools are
just as meagre. Economic urgencies are
no barrier to education in such schools.
Pupils have the advantage of living in
a community secluded from the English-speaking
atmosphere outside. They have
few distractions or obstacles to conversational
practice of the language.
There is no desire to reflect adversely
on the management of these schools.
Their primary concern is with moral
training, and the devotion shown in the
performance of that function is known
to all. As it would be unwarranted and
impertinent to comment on this matter,
so also, one who condemns what appears
to be the academic policy of the residential
school would prove himself rash and
uninformed. But, tell it not in the
colleges of Gath, whisper it not in the
convents of Ascalon, that many such
schools are not powerhouses generating
current to re-charge the wasted batteries
of Gaeldom. Many boys and girls
who graduate through the Irish colleges
are stamped with that shoddy culture
whose hallmark is a would-be faultless
English diction.
The blame often rests with the parent
and not with the school authority. It is
unfortunate that many do not comprehend
the meaning of nationality. The
country is still too close to that Anglo-Ireland
which confused the nation by
superimposing on it a foreign culture.
Into that foreign civilisation flowed all
that was bad in the Renaissance and also
the errors of the " Reformation." Since
the passing of Anglo-Ireland, it is in
course of disintegration here. Inevitably,
the Irish colleges will resume
continuity with Bangor and Clonmacnoise.
Youth is blamed for discarding the
Irish language when schooldays end.
They are urged to cherish the language,
advice which must cause them perplexity
when they become conscious of the realities
of life about them. Well may
Professor Daniel Corkery ask: " Is Irish
nationality in the grip of a stronger
nationality or is it not ? Which nationality
strides up and down, wagging its
head ? Whose language is heard in the
streets ? Whose books read ? Whose
history better known to the schoolboy-and
the politicians ? Whose public form
is copied ? Whose legal system used, to
the smallest device ? Whose social tradition
aped? Whose vernacular heard in our
churches? Whose language compulsory
in business? Which nationality names
our suburban houses-the houses of those
who have been educated in our higher
schools?" Who can give an answer to
the professor's devastating questionnaire?
Irish must be taken for granted. The
outward symbols of public life must be
such as to show that we intend to move
in the direction of living " Irishly."
Outward symbols will create a public
atmosphere to strengthen morale. In
this Ireland where a foreign nationality
" still strides up and down, wagging

Ni hiongnadh go dti stair na hEireann

its head " we are asking too much of the
young by asking that they practise
gaolachas. Let Irish be taken into the
world of reality. Let banker and huckster
put his trade or name over his
business-house in Irish; let the advertiser
put up his neon light in Irish; let merchandise
by 'plane and ship bearing Irish
title be despatched abroad and not
offer the excuse that use of the language
in this connection '' would make things
difficult for the foreigner." As long as
we allow our nationality to remain "in
the grip of the stronger nationality "
all effort to revive the Irish language
will be reduced to a travesty.
Rock and Hedge
In the struggle for political freedom,
Ireland sought inspiration from her olden
heroes and fighting men. They flit across
the screen of history against the background
of the Gal Greine, the Green
Flag, and the Tricolour. There is Cu
Chulainn and the Red Branch followed by
Fionn and the Fianna; Brian MacCinneide;
O'Neill at Benburb; Sarsfield, who "rode
out the Dutch to rout "; O'Dwyer in the
Wicklow Hills " on his keeping" ; Tone,
on the bridge of a French war-vessel
off Bantry ; Emmet yielding his young
life in Thomas Street, Dublin ; and the
man called Pearse dying in a vital hour
of Ireland's history. As they were an
inspiration in the physical struggles of
the past, there are other figures in history
who symbolise the unfulfilled aspiration
-of the Ireland of today. Two such stand
out against the background of the brutal
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries who
laboured to preserve the persecuted
faith and the outlawed culture. They
were, the hunted priest who tended the
lamp of faith and the hedge teacher
who kept burning the torch of knowledge.
Rock
The Catholic faith had been persecuted
in Ireland since the time of Henry VIII.
of England. It was not, however, until
the advent of the " glorious " and " immortal"
William of Orange that the
Penal Code was introduced and this
despite the clause in the Treaty of
Limerick guaranteeing freedom of worship-
a broken contract which every
schoolboy knows was well and truly
avenged in English blood at Fontenoy.
In the reign of Queen Anne, these laws
were applied with renewed vigour and
under the tirst and second Georges they
were more brutally implemented than
ever before. Such laws did not acknowledge
that an " Irish Roman Catholic"
existed. The attitude of " authority "
to the religious faith of the Irish people
may be seen if one recalls the words used
by the Lord Chief Justice who delivered
judgment on Blessed Oliver Plunket,
one of the last of that brave band who
were devoted to their faith "even to
the last full measure of devotion."
In passing sentence the unjust judge
said . . . '' for the botton1 of your
treason was setting up your false religion,
than which there is nothing more displeasing
to God, or more pernicious to
mankind in the world. A religion that
is ten times worse than all heathenish
superstitions ... " (There is no record
in history that this man's words
choked him.) The martyr himself, while
awaiting death, wrote to his nephew in
Rome, "I expect daily to be brought
to the place of execution, where my
bowels are to be cut out and burnt
before my face and then my head to be
cut off, etc. which death I embrace
willingly." It is said that the Earl of
Essex pleaded with the king for the life
of the primate who, he stated, was
innocent. Pilate-like, the creature known
as Charles II answered : " His blood
be upon your head and not mine."
Perhaps no one shall ever write a more
fitting or searing indictment on the Penal
Code than did Burke : " . . . . . as well
fitted for the oppression, impoverishment
and degradation of a feeble people and
the debasement in them of human
nature itself, as ever proceeded from the
perverted ingenuity of men."
In his work, "And So Began the Irish
Nation," Seamus Mac Call writes : "The
Irish were rob bed of food for bodies,
minds and souls that barbarous pictures
of Irish life and Irish character might
pass unchallenged in the guise of history.
And, organised starvation and relentless
persecution made it possible to give to
the world the cruel fiction of 'rude,
beastly, ignorant and unruly infidels '
who were only saved from savage vices
and anarchy by the 'civilising force ' of
those who coveted their possession."
The king's proclamation of 1605, republished
in 1611, contained the following
article : "Whosoever shall harbour a
priest in town or country shall forfeit
his possessions to the Crown." Following
on the heels of this came the
command:
Let each and every one be present
at our rites, ceremonies, etc., on Sundays
and festivals.

The people, however, preferred the Mass
on Sundays and festivals which they
attended in a barn, in an isolated hovel,
in a field, or in a retreat in the hills.
Today, in the country cottages, one may
see a picture of Daniel O'Connell or of
Robert Emmet hanging on the whitewashed
wall. Often, pride of place
between them is given to another picture
depicting a ragged congregation kneeling
about their priest who holds aloft a
wooden cup, the vessel of God, above a
rough stone slab, His altar. The people
assisted at the solemn rite while men and
boys kept watch at points of vantage to
warn against the approach of the priest-hunter.
This was the country that
had been famed throughout western
Christendom as Insula Sanctorum et
Doctorum. (It may be here noted as a
matter of interest that the Ancient
Order of Hibernians-the Defenders-was
founded in 1565 by Rory Oge O
Moore in the County Kildare to protect
the priest while celebrating Holy Mass
in glen or mountain cave.)
The priest of the Penal Age (" golden
priests " with " wooden chalices ") was
the watchman of the people's faith and
made possible the triumph of the day
when a legate of the Apostolic See
received the homage of the Irish nation
within the walls of the bastion of the
invader himself, the Royal Castle of
Dublin. In the year of Grace, 1932,
words that came from the deep, warm
heart of Ireland re-echoed in the Hall of
Saint Patrick :
Mile, mile fáilte rómhat, aris agus
aris eile, a theachtaire uasal ó thobar
bheannuighthe grasta Chriost-.
So grind the mills of God !
Hedge
In the king's proclamation referred to
above was the following ukase :
Let no papist dare to exercise the
function of schoolmaster in this kingdom.
Lecky, an agnostic, wrote : "The legislation
on the subject of Catholic education
may be briefly described, for it
amounted simply to universal, unqualified
and unlimited persecution."
The bardic schools, dating back to
pre-Patrician times had continued down
to the middle of the 17th century. The
system had been revised at Druim Ceata
near the end of the sixth century. The
schools were secular institutions and
Irish was the teaching medium, the
Latin tongue being added to the curriculum
later. Literature, history and
the Brehon laws were studied. The
monastic schools which had existed beside
their secular counterparts had been
suppressed for a century before Cromwell's
regime ended the Bardic Schools
in 1641. Later, the " courts of poetry "
were established. And in the seventeenth
century, the "hedge schools" were
instituted.
" Because the law forbade the schoolmaster
to teach, he was compelled to give
instruction secretly. Because the household
was penalised for harbouring the
schoolmaster, he had perforce to teach,
and that only when the weather permitted,
out-of-doors. He, therefore,
selected in some remote spot the sunnyside
of a hedge or bank which effectively
hid him and his pupils from the
eye of the chance passer-by, and there
he sat upon a stone as he taught his
little school while his scholars lay
stretched upon the green sward about
him. One pupil was usually placed at
a point of vantage to give warning of
the approach of strangers; and, if the
latter were suspected of being law officers
or informers, the classes were quickly
disbanded for the day-only to meet
again on the morrow in some place still
more sheltered and remote."
The above extract from the work of
P. J. Dowling on this subject tells
briefly why the "hedge schools" were
established and how they functioned
despite the conditions of the time.
Instruction was given through Irish,
but, about the beginning of the nineteenth
century, English began to supplant
the native tongue in this respect in many
of the hedge schools. Again, to quote
Dowling:
" Yet the schoolmaster must have deplored
what was happening, for every
now and then we find him either defiantly
singing the praises of the language or
regretting its decay. He has been instrumental,
however, in the preservation
of thousands of legends, songs and
poems and in helping to perpetuate the
use of his native tongue." And in an
introduction to " The Poets and Poetry
of Munster," John P. Dalton adds his
tribute to the work of the hedge-master.
" It is one of the marvels of history,"
Dalton writes, " that the spirit of song-the
love of intellectual culture-did not
expire in the country, crushed to death
by an atrociously drastic code of statutes,
during that prolonged tragedy. Culture
is the aliment of song ; and the national
culture must assuredly have perished
were it not that, when driven into hiding-places,
its ebbing life was fondly nursed
and tended throughout by itinerant
schoolmasters . . . ''
The system of national (sic) education
imposed on Ireland in 1831 put an end
to the hedge schools. When anglicisation
was in spate, they had stemmed the
tide and saved much of Gaelic culture
from the wreck. The best-laid plans of
Whatelys go awry and history will
couple with that tribute to the hedge
schoolmasters a tribute to the national
teacher (and his pupils) who for many
years now have laboured to rescue the
remnants of our folklore from oblivion in
co-operation with An Cumann le Bealoideas
Eireann.
The National Need
The pioneers of the revival had to
concentrate their early endeavours on
the actual teaching of the Irish language
itself. This has since become a function
of the schools, and Gaelic organisations
have other tasks and duties now. The
future historian will accord high honour
to the Gaelic League, for the league reawakened
the nation's slumbering soul.
But, the league has failed to realise or
else cope with the modern demand, and,
consequently, fails to attract support.
It is unfair to criticise youth for " aping
the foreign culture " if attempts to
provide the native alternative are
puerile and sporadic. Social intercourse
through Gaelic must become a normal
feature of daily life in Ireland. The
Gaelic speaker must still label himself
with a " fainne " or a " nasc " and
reconcile himself to the treatment
afforded to a fanatic or a crank or prepare to be regarded as a phenomenon,
a dreamer or an idealist whose activities
are outside the scope of ordinary existence.
Pearse wrote : " You need not
praise the Irish language-simply speak
it; you need not denounce English
games-play Irish ones ; you need not
ignore foreign history , foreign literature
-deal with them from the Irish point-of-view. " Our orientation needs adjustment which will result in taking Irish for
granted. (In connection with Irish games,
it may be noted that the Gaelic Athletic
Association was not the first body to
put a " ban " on sport. We recall that
in 1527 the Mayor and Council of Galway
City decreed " . . . . . at no tyme to
use ne occupye the horlinge of the litil
balle with hockie stickes or staves nor
use no handle ball to playe without the
walles, but onely the great foote balle."
The Mayor and Council were wise in
their generation as the Gaelic Athletic
Association is equally wise now. )
Social and intellectual activity must
be organised permanently through the
medium of Gaelic. The phrase " Tá
mé i mo chodladh, ná duisigh me " is inscribed on the tomb of Donn Byrne ; it
will be a more apt epitaph for the tombs
stone of the Gaelic League if that moribund
institution does not revivify itself.
The handbook of " Comhdhdil Náisiunta
na Gaedhilge" has an imposing list of
organisations which engage in work which
is limited to a special aspect of the
revival. None is fulfilling the function
of welding Ireland's young into a
national movement to speak the language
learned in school every day of the year
as well as on Saint Patrick's Day . The
Gaelic League failed to utilise the raw
material produced in the school and
fashion a finished product in a youth
league of the nation. The league is
conservative, academic, and static and
young men would no more think of
courting it than of dallying about the
skirts of a Victorian spinster.
The national need demands a national
movement with a national policy. Only
such a movement will give the language
drive that necessary impetus which will
carry it forward to a position in the
nation's life that will ensure its ultimate
triumph . The language has not yet
received that impetus. There is no national
organisation in existence which provides
the opportunity and the encouragement
on practical lines to facilitate the youth
" living Irishly ." The result is apparent
and the language is ignored and eventually forgotten when schooldays end.
Want of practice in speaking a language
will eventually result in the loss of all
fluency in that language . (Apropos of
this, the American politician, Mr. Byrne,
makes an amusing observation in his
book " Speaking Frankly ." Referring
to the difficulty of exploring avenues
of agreement at an international conference which was attended by Mr.
Molotov, the writer states that the
Soviet Minister only knew two words of
English, namely, " I agree . " " So seldom
does he agree , '' observes Mr. Byrne ,
" that his pronunciation isn't very
good. " )
The revival depends on youth. It
demands much of human nature for one
to speak habitually in Gaelic in an
English environment. Such a paragon
cannot be created. Youth inhabits the
same practical world as its elders and
cannot remain permanently keyed up
to a high pitch of national endeavour.
It is as sensible and as fruitful to whistle
jigs to a milestone as to appeal to youth
to be enthusiastic about Irish because
it is the language of the "combination
of chemical elements" called Eire.
The blithe spirit of youth needs amusement, intellectual interests and social
intercourse which are necessary to the
gregarious nature of man. All the amenities which are essentials for the moderns
must be provided within the orbit of
Gaeldom. Only then may the altruism,
idealism and eternal resilience of the
young be harnessed to its best advantage
in the work of making their country
Gaelic-speaking.
These things must be provided in no
haphazard fashion but must be found in
'flourishing centres of Gaelic activity.
Padraig or Brighid would be a dull boy
or girl without legitimate recreation and
amusement, but as they have no national
movement catering for such needs through
the medium of Irish, they seek their
recreational and intellectual pleasures
where they can be found, in the realistic
Ireland depicted by its outward symbols - the
Ireland of the "wagging-head" referred
to by Daniel Corkery.
The suggestion is not merely to establish
another Gaelic movement similar to
existing ones ; a movement more comprehensive is visualised. It must embrace a national endeavour, encouraging
all interests and having but one crystal-clear
objective-a Gaelic-speaking Ireland.
The ideal is a comradeship of
Irish youth whose latent possibilities for
the revival will be exploited by leading
them unwittingly into the realisation of
Gaelic Ireland itself by supplying their
recreational and intellectual needs
through Gaelic. Seeking for an analogy,
such a movement would have a similar
relation to the Gaelic League and Glum
na Buaidhe as the Catholic Boy Scouts
of Ireland have to the Fianna Eireann
Scouts and the Baden-Powell organisation.
The equation might, therefore,read:
Fianna Eireann Rock Gaelic League
CBS. : ·· and ::
Baden-Powell Hedge Glun na Buaidhe
As the one is scouting based on Catholic
ideals, so the other would be Gaelicism
based on Catholic principles in a loosely-knit
comradeship of youth on a national
scale. The movement would develop
spontaneously and independently throughout
the country and its activities be
co-ordinated by an authority vested in
an Ard-Chomhairle.
In this movement, the individual would
gravitate to that aspect of the movement's
activities which would interest
him most-the study circle, the playing-pitch,
or the lure of the open road. Its
headquarters and members would be
active in each of Ireland's thirty-two
counties. It would be inspired by the
ideals of our history and might well have
for its twin symbol the Rock and Hedge.
Focal Scuir
We live in a new, bleak dawn-on the
threshold of the atomic age of nuclear
energy. It is common for man in this
age to believe that science has made him
independent of his Maker. Science has
contracted the world, thereby expanding
the scope of pernicious influences. The
contact with such influences is closer
every day-influences which are opposed
to the pattern of life woven into the
warp and woof of the Ireland of History.
The ultimate perspective, the Vision
Divine, is our raison d'etre. All else to
us is but
A tale
Told by an idiot full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.
It is such a teller, clad in second-hand
and shoddy " shreds and patches" of
thought who cannot understand that a
Gaelic Ireland is compatible with modern
life. It is far better for us to remain
clad in the homespun of our racial
thinking. Only then shall we prove
true to the toiling generations of our
fathers all down the bitter years. Only
then may we hope to gather that harvest
for which they prepared the ground into
the granaries of Inis Fail. The Faith,
whose most solemn rite was consummated
on a Rock, must be the inspiration
in this task of replacing the hegemony
of the alien's culture with the tradition
that was driven for survival behind a
Hedge.
Nior chaith si a re 's ni baoghal gur
thuit
Tá beatha 'na géaga, is fraoch 'na fuil
Tá brigh 'gus fuinneamh 'na croidhe
'sna cuislinn,
Is chifear ise in-áirde .
Ag baint an fhomhair
