Look, sir King, eye us well, it is not light prowess that has caused these valiant bodies
to stoop. Scythians were we, and the Picts of Scythia, great substance of glory lodgeth in
these two names.
Edmund Campion, Historie of Ireland, Bk. I., X.
The late Mr. Birrell once entered
a defence of Shelley's definition
of recorded history-a 'cyclic poem
written by Time upon the memories
of men.'
One feels inclined to utter a caveat
against such an oracular intrusion by
a poet into the somewhat pedestrian
course of history ; for the occasion let
it be admitted.
The Franciscan vision is the most
entrancing survival of medieval chivalry.
Its magnificence and charm remain
undimmed after the passing of seven
centuries. Apart from its supernatural
content the secret of its appeal is its
poetry. 'The Poverello had the power
of poetic intuition. Abstractions had
scarcely time to lodge in his mind before
they trembled into things of living
beauty his life was, consequently, his
greatest poem.'
The lyricism of the Fioretti is memorable
because of studies in still-life.
We see the tableaux vivants of the sundrenched
valleys of Umbria. Celano
tells us more. In his pages the story of
the vision is an epic.
The inspiration given to Francis never
grew less. It accomplished for succeeding
generations what it had wrought
in the souls of Bernard da Quintavalle,
Peter Cathanii, and Brother Giles. That
is to say, it redeems from decay the
visitations of the divinity to man. And
these were the terms of Shelley's final
verdict on the purpose of poetry.
Celano describes the Pope's rejection
when the Franciscan Rule was submitted.
That night Innocent dreamt that the
Lateran basilica was tottering to its
fall. Disaster was a voided when a religious,
small of stature and lowly of
appearance, set his back against the
swaying walls. The Pope recalled
Francis and gave approval to the Rule.
In the sixteenth century the Church
of Christ appeared to totter. The
Council of Trent launched the counter-reformation.
The Rule of Francis was one
of the means adopted by the Fathers in
Council. Father Francis Nugent thought
of his native land-the Capuchins came
to Ireland. Another cycle in the great
epic was begun.
The Capuchin-Franciscan story is.
interwoven with the sad happenings
which resulted from the breakdown of
the Confederation of Kilkenny. The
papal legate, Archbishop Rinuccini, was.
constrained to send Father Richard O
Farrell, the Capuchin superior at Galway,
to Rome in order that the Pope might
learn of the trend of events in Ireland.
Later, with Father Robert O Connell
(who will tell us of the Capuchin origins
in Cork) Father O Farrell did a noble
service for posterity. The two Capuchins
wrote the Commentarius Rinuccinianus.
The MS lay undisturbed for almost
three hundred years. In the cataclysm
of 1939-45 incendiary bombs destroyed
the archives in the Castello of Milan.
The original Commentarius perished in
the flames but not before it had been
copied.
A long line of Capuchins from Father
O Connell's days to our own has made
history-indelible on the memories of
men. Let us, then, make the obiter
dicta of Mr. Birrell the subject of investigation.
I
In comparison with the Dominicans,
the Augustinians, and the Franciscans,
the Capuchins are late comers to Cork.
The more venerable Orders suffered
spoliation during the Great Suppression ;
the Friars Minor Capuchin came to
Ireland to implement the reforms of the
counter-reformation.
Just over three hundred years ago
the parish of St. Finbarr received the
first Capuchins to arrive in Cork and
their association with the parish has
Continued to the present day. The
soaring spire of the Father Mathew
memorial church is a measure of what
three centuries have seen-the triumph
of fidelity over adversity. To suffer
and to do many things in the cause
of Divine charity is integral to the
Franciscan rule ; it is an epitome of the
Capuchin chapter in the south parish
-of Cork. And the writing of the chapter
is beset by many difficulties.
A Franciscan writer confesses to the
indefiniteness surrounding the lives of
most Franciscan heroes. It is, he concludes, a heritage from the divine perversion
of things long ago when men
lost the body of St. Francis because they
laid it away so safely !
The Capuchins share in that heritage,
their story has not yet been told. It
lies in manuscript histories, in reports
to the Commissary General, in Roman
archives and other sources. True, the
broad outlines are readily to be discerned
-a frame work which is the setting of
high resolves and ultimate fulfilment.
We lay fast hold of the fact-the Order
of Friars Minor Capuchin came to Cork
in 1637. We are allowed to learn the
unequivocal tradition, namely, the hospitium
or as it was termed in later years,
the 'little friary ' of the Capuchins was
from the beginning located ' out of the
South Gate of Corke.' Until 1743,
names appear and disappear with tantalising
elusiveness-and oftentimes we
are left to puzzle and surmise in a cloud
of unknowingness. The Capuchin
chronicle, pieced together from these
documents, does not lack realism ; to
us, reading them to the year 1850,
the delicate spire of the Church of the
Holy Trinity is a fitting colophon.
Even Roque's map of Cork (1759)
fits in with the Franciscan scheme of
anonymity. Clearly defined are the
massive battlements of Elizabeth Fort ;
the barracks, a stone's throw to the east,
assure the protection of garrison to one
of the main arteries of Cork, the south
gate bridge. On the river side, today
known as Sullivan's Quay, is figured
a line of single-storeyed houses, their
mitred eaves springing one from the
other conspire to conceal from identification
the blurred near-background.
Somewhere within the huddled nondescript
maze was the little friary--in
Blackamoor Lane.
The Poverello would have hailed the
name with glee. Tradition has it that
one of the little houses on the quayside
was a place of good cheer for mariners.
The innkeeper's fancy had caused to be
set above the door the moulding of a
Moor's head. Francis, too, was once
preoccupied with the Moors after their
bloody defeat at Las Nivas. He travelled
to Spain to bring the consolations of
Christianity to the conquered. A few
years later, he accompanied the crusading
armies to the walls of Damietta,
and leaving the Christian camp, crossed
to the enemy to engage after his own
fashion the hosts of Mohammed. It
was a fruitless quest ; Francis returned
the pilgrim way. For his followers
arriving in Cork in 1637, the sign of the
Moor's head called up memories . A
tiny house to the rear of the tavern was
secured and remodelled to a friary ;
it was their Rivo Torto. On the winding
south branch of the Lee a new epoch in
the high adventure was begun.
Lavallin Nugent, founder of the Irish
Capuchin mission, was born at Walshes-town,
Co. Meath, in 1596. [note: Historia, p. 12 ; Historie, p. 1 ; Synopsis, p. 36.]
He was the
second son of Sir Edward Nugent and
Margaret O Connor. As a young man
he studied at the university of Paris
and attained his doctorate before his
twentieth year. He taught philosophy
in the Pedagogium Falconis, Louvain,
for a short period before making his
final decision to enter the Capuchins.
'On 4 October, 1591, at Brussels he was
vested in the Capuchin habit receiving
in religion the name Francis. Three
years later he was ordained.
Already the Tridentine reforms were
gathering impetus in England. To
Father Francis Nugent the names of
Allen, Parsons, Campion, Mayne meant
much. Campion's Brag held the secret
alchemy of martyrdom :
' And touching our Societie be it
known to you that we have made a
league-all Jesuits in the world, whose
succession and multitude must overreach
all the practices of England
-cheerfully to carry the cross you
shall lay upon us, and never to despair
your recovery while we have a man
left to enjoy your Tyburn, or to be
racked with your torments, or consumed
with your prisons. The expense
is reckoned, the enterprise is begun ; it
is of God, it cannot be withstood.'
So faith was planted ; so it must be
restored.
Such was a martyr's resolution of
the knot of circumstances. It was
Father Nugent's cherished hope to introduce
the Capuchins to Ireland as a
phalanx of reform. Never was wisdom
more justified in her children.
The Irish background on the eve of
the Capuchin venture was not discouraging.
The confiscation of the monasteries
and collegiate churches was indeed
a severe blow but Catholic buoyancy
was quickly asserted.
In 1603, the people of Cork took time
by the forelock; the mayor and corporation
refused to proclaim James Stuart.
MacRedmond, a schoolmaster, poured
scorn on a king 'who had nothing to
live upon but abbeys and church lands,
and therefore, the city had good reason
not to obey him.' The State Papers
document the excitement when Thomas
Sarsfield, mayor, and William Sarsfield,
Robert and Walter Coppinger, John
Roche and Philip Martell placed a guard
at the city gates and proclaimed the old
Faith. It was only natural that Father
Robert Meade and Father John and
Father Dominick Roche should have
claimed the restoration of Christ Church
and St. Peter's. The bare stem of an
ancient tradition flowered when ' a great
part of the town with priests, copes,
and banners began their procession and
hallowed the churches.' But Sir
George Thornton called a halt to the
pageantry. He reported to Mountjoy,
'yesterday brought a Spanish saker from
Haulbowline, and placing her before the
town raked three or four shot through
some of their houses . ' [note: Historia, p. 12 ; Historie, p. 1 ; Synopsis, p. 36.]
Despite official orders to depart the
priests remained and continued to
celebrate Mass in private houses ' even
in the hearing of all men.' The stone
houses of Thomas Sarsfield, John Roche,
Walter Coppinger abutted the city walls
on the eastern side, a few yards from
the present Grand Parade. Today not
a stone is left of the residences where
the Catholic burghers of Cork gave
sanctuary to the Lord of hosts.
Mountjoy, and later, Chichester, were
not easily reconciled to the loss of all
that had been gained at Kinsale. In
1604 and 1605, and again in 1611, a
severely anti-Catholic policy was outlined.
The Holy See saw the omens; Paul
V promised succour to the Irish Catholics.
Many spiritual favours were granted,
the practice of the Faith in its many
forms was richly indulgenced, including
a plenary indulgence for all who would
visit Lough Derg. In the papal briefs
one can detect the authentic note of
Trent.
The long-awaited opportunity came
to Father Francis Nugent. His petition
to Paul V to sanction a Capuchin mission
to Ireland was approved on 29 May, 1608.
An appeal to Irish priests of the
Order in France, Germany, and the Low
Countries met with a ready response.
Four Irish youths were accepted for
the Irish mission at Cologne in 1611.
Increasing numbers made a distinct house
of training desirable and Father Nugent
gladly accepted an offer by the Walloon
Fathers of their unfinished convent at
Charleville, near Sedan, France. The building
was completed in 1620. Carolopolis
occurs frequently in the O Connell and
Archbold MSS-it was the alma mater
of a succession of Irish Capuchins who
walked in the darkness of persecution.
We may be tempted at times to think
that for the Irish students the crouching
figures of the hangman and the executioner
figured on what De Quincey called
the gorgeous mosaic of dreams ; the
metaphor, however, is somewhat offset
by O Connell's terse description of
Charleville-' a little Irish republic. ' [note: 2 Historia, p. 297.]
The first Capuchin missionary reached
Ireland in 1615. He was Father Stephen
Daly, a native of Tisaran, Offaly.
Later he was joined by Father Laurence
Nugent, Father Columbanus Glynn,
Father Robert Comyn and Father Edward
Bath. From MSS sources, shortly to
be quoted, it is clear that formal foundations
were not contemplated; the
missionaries lived for the most part in
private houses whence they travelled,
singly and in pairs, through the countryside
celebrating Mass, administering the
Sacraments, preaching and instructing.
More than once O Connell lays emphasis
on the fact that the missionaries spoke
both in Irish and in English. More
significant from the point of view of
Tridentine reforms was the deliberate
striving after personal holiness. The
' quaedam inviolabiliter servanda '-a
rule of life drawn up by Father Barnaby
Barnewall, the Irish superior-would
serve today as a most exacting approach
to sanctity. [note: 3 ibid. p. 337.]
The early missionaries witnessed
Wentworth's determined efforts to create
a new political and social economy. The
merciless confiscations of vast areas in
Clare, Tipperary and Kilkenny, the
swelling of the royal revenues by fines
on non-compliant jurors brought in a
winter of grave discontent. The Anglo-Irish
nobles gradually realised that their
tenure was in jeopardy. The Deputy's
creation of a standing army in Ireland
weighed heavily on towns and cities.
Protests by the Irish Upper House and
Commons occasioned a copying of
the English precedent ; Wentworth
dissolved parliament. Anglo-Irish and
native Irish saw the futility of brooding
over private wrongs; deeper soundings
brought home an imperative need

What's wrong here? 

national unity. The luckless Wentworth
expiated his political miscalculations on
the block in 1640 ; by then Irish solidarity
was drawing nearer. At last
national unity was asserted at the Confederation
of Kilkenny in 1642. Father
Richard O Farrell acted as interpreter
at the opening sessions; some years
later he told the history of the Confederation
in the Commentarius Rinuccinianus.
There was no ambiguity in the attitude
of the citizens of Cork towards
Wentworth's experiment. The corporation
was adamant in its refusal to meet
the billet-levies of the heavily reinforced
garrisons at Shandon Castle and Elizabeth
Fort. The Deputy's admonition to the
city elders was minatory : ' if the townsmen
of Cork shall not afford the officers
and soldiers food and convenient lodging,
with what otherwise hath been usual,
then the Mayor and Sheriffs of Cork
are required to afford to prime resident
officers . . . a proportionate allowance
towards their billets . . . and failing
which . . . the Mayor and Corporation
are to appear before us to show
cause to the contrary.' To add exacerbation, the corporation was forced
to defend a further violation of their
charter privileges in the matter of jury
service.
The Catholics, Anglo-Irish and native
Irish alike, did not dwell in unrealities.
By 1639 secret emissaries were in France
revealing the shape of things to come
when the ' war of the three kingdoms '
should break out. If the nation's
courage were to be taxed to the uttermost
in the following years the arrival
of the Capuchins in Cork in 1637 was,
in truth, a singular portent.
II
In the year 1637 a young Kerry
student, Daniel 0 Connell, [note: From the same family came the Liberator in
the next century.]
was studying
in Cork under the tutelage of Dr. Donatus
O Kenneally. He witnessed the beginnings
of the Capuchin mission in the
south suburbs of the city, a short distance
eastwards from the south gate bridge.
His interest was enhanced by the fact
that he intended to join the friars. Not
only was the young Kerry lad a frequent
visitor to the capella of the friars but he
was acquainted with the pioneer founders
and the circumstances of their coming.
On St. Patrick's Day, 1640, Daniel
O Connell sailed from Cork for Bordeaux
where he spent the next four years in
the Irish college, attending lectures at
the Jesuit university. His application
to enter the noviciate of the Irish Capuchins
was not at first successful; it was
not until 1645 that he was accepted,
taking the name Robert in religion.
Following his ordination in Paris in 1561
Father O Connell was recalled to Charleville.
His superiors enjoined on him
the task of writing the history of the
Capuchin mission to Ireland. The
'Historia Missionis Hiberniae Fratrum
Minorum Capuccinorum ' was begun in
1652 and completed in 1655. Father
Robert O Connell's description of the
early Capuchin scene in Cork has an
autobiographical perspective ; young
enthusiasm gives classic shape to well-remembered
events.
We may wonder at the casualness of
it all. A priest of the diocese of Cork,
once a Capuchin novice, Father James
Martell, invited a friend of his student
days to pay a visit to Cork. In response
to the call of friendship Father Robert
Comyn accepted the hospitality of
Father Martell. To such a commonplace
happening we must ascribe the
Capuchin advent to Cork. Father
O Connell relates :
Anno 1620.
' Time would fail me if I were to
detail the many letters sent from
Ireland in that year and directed to
Charleville. For the sake of brevity
I shall omit them to tell of the invitation
from Cork, a noble city in
Munster which, on the authority of
Innocent III, was the ancient seat
of kings.
A worthy priest, James Martell,
addressed his letter in English (rendered
into Latin by me) to Father Francis ;
The invitation was set forth thus :
" Most Reverend Father,
Recently Father Robert Comyn,
my friend and brother, paid a visit
to these parts. During his sojourn
amongst us he endeared himself to
all; his preaching and conversation
were the source of much edification.
Accordingly, I have been impelled
by the superior here and by many
others of my friends to beg of you
to send some Capuchins to this city.
Do not decline my entreaty, I pray
you, rather grant it forthwith. I
give you my confident assurance that
the presence of your brethren in our
midst shall be of great advantage,
with God's help, not only to the
spiritual formation of the laity but
also to us in the priesthood.
Your devoted servant,
James Martell." '[note: 5 Historia, pp. 24 7 -48. The superior mentioned in
the letter was the Bishop of Cork (OConnell's
note).] 
Not until seventeen years later, in
1637, was it possible to accept the invitation.
In that year Father Robert
Comyn and Father Michael O Coileain
were sent to Cork to undertake the
first Capuchin mission.
The O Connell MS gives the first of
Father O Coileain's Irish adventures
in picturesque detail. The sea-journey
from Chester to Dublin was a prelude
to the greater hazards which lay ahead.
Father O Connell quotes Archbold who
was in Dublin when Father O Coileain
arrived in 1633.
' It is recorded in the life of St. Paul
that he was once in peril of shipwreck,
but through God's providence all the
ship's passengers were saved; disaster
came only to the ship. I conclude
that some such divine favour was
vouchsafed to Father Michael O Coileain.
When, in obedience to the
commands of his superiors to labour
on the Irish mission, he was sailing
across the sea which divides England
and Ireland, a terrific storm arose
striking terror into the hearts of all.
The straining of the rigging was
accompanied by the lamentations of
the voyagers when the Captain declared
that he had abandoned all
hope of safety and advised all to be
concerned with the salvation of their
souls. Father Michael came forward
and announced that he was a priest
and he exhorted all to sorrow for
their sins. On the heretics he urged
the necessity of the Catholic Faith
for salvation; on the Catholics he
pressed the need for sacramental
confession-let them come forward and
receive absolution even though the
tempest might not be abated yet
they right be reconciled to God and
not condemned to eternal loss. There
were many Catholics on board and
they complied. There were not
wanting many heretics who there and
then embraced the Faith. Contrary
to general expectation it so fell out
that the ship made port and all arrived
safe and unharmed. Father Michael
was hailed as the servant of God and
the angel of their salvation.' [note: ibid. p. 383.]
Anno 1637.
The choice of Father Comyn and
Father O Coileain was helped by the
happy association of Father Comyn with
Sir Dominic Coppinger, the recorder of
Cork, and the fact that Father O Coileain
was a native of Carbery, in west Cork,
The O Connell MS continues:
'In the year 1620, as we have
already stated, the people of Cork
invited our brethren to come to their
city. At the time, owing to shortage
of priests, we were unable to meet
their wishes until the year in which
the above events took place. Then
Father Robert Comyn, an humble
servant of God and beloved of his
fellowmen, together with Father
Michael, a native of an adjoining
territory, took up his abode there.
Father Robert was well suited for
such an undertaking. Speaking both
Irish and English (for both languages
were in common use in Cork) Father
Robert was endowed with notable
powers of eloquence, with an amiable
disposition and a natural courtesy.
His profound learning, his preaching
ability mellowed by the daily exercise
of pastoral duties over a period of
twenty years, meant to him a gathered
store of missionary experience.
He found an active helper in his
brother's daughter, Mary Comyn, a
prudent and pious lady, who was the
wife of Sir Dominic Coppinger, a
distinguished knight, a citizen of importance
and recorder of Cork. He
embodied the goodwill of many by
reason of his ties of blood and marriage
with most of the prominent families.
With many others he assisted the
Capuchins.
Most of the townfolk-because of
a divinely-wrought christian integrity
of life-manifested a spontaneous reverence
to all followers of the religious
life, and especially towards our Order.
The Bishop of Cork (it is an episcopal
see) William Thirrey, in whose person
sanctity and learning vie for
supremacy, gave unstinted aid in
setting up the Capuchins. He was
actuated by the knowledge that their
closest concern is the glory of God,
the salvation of their own souls and
the souls of the people. In addition
they are solicitous in maintaining the
happiest concord with local bishops
and particularly with the diocesan
clergy.
It has always been the established
practice with our missionaries and
approved custom amongst our brethren
to re-arrange a private or lay residence
to provide a chapel, cells, and the
quarters necessary for community life.
So it was done in Cork.' [note: ibid. pp. 457 -58.]
Father O Connell retained vivid
memories of the first Capuchin hospice
in Cork; riches devoid of time-lustre
were gathered under its thatched roof.
' I have seen that little church.
It was the genuine expression of
seraphic poverty and religious piety.
I saw there a rigid observance of the
Capuchin rule-in those days, alas, I
was a victim of the twofold distractions
of adolescence and worldiness-contempt of the world, humility,
modesty, simplicity, love of solitude.
I saw their fasts, their hours of prayer,
their denial of the flesh, their preoccupation
with the things of God,
their instant obedience, their shining
purity, their attachment to God and His
angels-in all things innocent before
men. From that humble abode, as
from some heavenly censer, ascended
a cloud of incense, fragrant as the
perfumes of Saba, which spread through
the streets of Cork, diffusing amongst
Catholics and non-Catholics a spiritual
sweetness. With my own ears I have
heard Father Robert preach in Irish
in that very place. I marvelled at
the spirit of the man, his eloquence
and his learning. In very truth, when
in the pulpit he was like an angel of
God giving utterance to Divine truth.' [note: 8 ibid.]
A description of the old city, as Father
O Connell saw it in the years 1637-1640,
notes the extension of suburbs as a
result of the new mercantile population.
A robust Corporation resisted any alien
intrusion into the narrow limits of the
city proper. The tasks and pastoral
journeys of the Capuchins were hampered
by the English strongholds set up by
Boyle, Earl of Cork, in the townships
of Bandon, Kinsale, Doneraile. In the
O Connell MS there is an intensity
of feeling, a vividness of phrase and a
fierce enthusiasm recalling once more the
Pauline epistles. Our English rendering
carries nothing but the meaning:
' Two factors make the city notable ;
on the one hand, its maritime position,
on the other, the river and its fisheries
whose divided branches wash against
the walls and thence to the sea. It
is admirably situated, therefore, for
internal and foreign trade. Its good
fortune in that respect has attracted
many Calvinists from England, but
they, through the good sense of the
citizens, have been denied admission
to the city. Accordingly, they have
built themselves extensive suburbs to
the north and south. Among their
number is an heretical bishop, and
in their colonies are included some
pseudo-ministers of the same leaven,
blind and leaders of the blind.
In the countryside are other townships,
namely, Bandonbridge, Kinsale,
Youghal, Doneraile, Mallow and other
settlements, walled, for the most part
and at some distance from each
other. In these places the wheat
Irish Capuchin friary, Vassy, France (1683-1790)
Cove Street, Cork, has not changed very much since Father Mathew's day. Picture shows on right:
Warren's Row where he lived; the second house on left was the boyhood home of Ireland's great
sculptor, John Hogan; at the end are the schools of the Irish Christian Brothers, Sullivan's Quay.
of the Faith has been sown with the
cockle of the heretics.
I come now to the surrounding
districts and the plains of Cork which,
fertile and extensive, are ruled over
by powerful chieftains. It was a
happy state of things in those days
of felicity when almost all the inhabitants
were constant in their adherence
to the Faith. The harvest,
indeed, was promising and ripe for
the reaping-hook of the Gospel.
Wherefore, our brethren spared no
effort in cleansing it of the tares and
thorns of heresy, to glean the pure
grain of souls destined for eternal
glory-gathering them into the eternal
barns and granaries of Christ.
It were superfluous for me to describe
in detail how well Father Robert
[Comyn] succeeded in his labours ;
his outstanding aptitude, supported
by a burning zeal for souls, was transparent.
On one occasion, because of
extirpation of heresy, and on another,
because he had celebrated Mass, he
was apprehended by William St.
Leger, the heretical President of all
Munster and imprisoned, firstly in
Mallow, and then, in Cork.' [note: ibid.]
At this point we shall digress in order
to assemble the biographical details of
the two Capuchins, who, under God's
providence, traced the Capuchin-Franciscan
pattern in the ancient parish of
St. Finbarr. Though three hundred
years of crowded history intervene between
us and those early heroes the
clear dispassionate narrative of O Connell
has lost nothing of its freshness and
human appeal for the reason, doubtless,
that continuity of Faith gives
moments of exquisite contact.
Robert Comyn was born in Limerick
in the year 1582. As a young lad he
studied at Douai where he entered the
Capuchin noviciate in 1609. It seems
that Father Robert Comyn was one of
the first, if not the very first, to answer
the appeal of Father Nugent for volunteers
to serve on the Irish mission. He was
among the number who repaired to
Charleville and was present at the
erection of the wooden cross on the site
of the new monastery. He left Charleville
for Ireland accompanied by Father
Columbanus Glynn in 1618. Soon after
the commencement of their missionary
labours they were taken prisoners but
managed to effect their escape. The
number of Capuchins in Ireland in 1618
was five ; the little company met in what
must be regarded as the first provincial
chapter : Father Stephen Daly, Laurence
Nugent, Robert Comyn, Columbanus
Glynn, and Edward Bath. The Archbold
MS tells us:
' They were in all but five in number ;
yet lively and fruitful workers
in that poor distressed Evangelical
vineyard . . . elected as five cleere
stones out of this Seraphical Order,
by the high Pastor of pastors; to foile
and beat down the proud Goliath of opposite
standing, error, sin and Heresie.
These five Fathers meeting together
synodically in one place, after invocation
of the Holy Ghost, and
mature deliberation, they make certain
ordinances to be observed and practised
by them uniformly throughout the
whole kingdom. This was the first
Synod yt. Ours held in Ireland,
which was AD. 1618, 23 Augusti.' [note: 10 Archbold : Historie, p. 77 and p. 3.]
From the Archbold MS we learn that
Father Comyn spent his first years in
Ireland doing missionary work in the
MacCoghlan district of Offaly. He was
present when Father Stephen Daly died
on l March, 1620, somewhere in that
neighbourhood. The letter, already
quoted, indicates that he paid a visit
to Cork in the same year. The scene
of his activities for the next two years
was the mountainous country to the
south of Dublin. A letter written by
Father Robert to Father Nugent, quoted
by O Connell, describes some of the more
unpleasant customs and social habits
obtaining in the theatre of his labours.
Immoderate drinking earned Father
Robert's censure. A marginal note in
Archbold's Evangelical Fruct identifies
the place as the Glen of Imaal, Co.
Wicklow. [note: ibid. p. 410.]
Towards the end of 1622, as
appears from the concluding portion
of the letter, Father Robert was in the
vicinity of Newcastle, Co. Meath. Some
eight years later, in 1630, he furnished
a report to the commissary-general,
quoted ty O Connell, on various aspects
of Capuchin missionary activity in
Leinster. [note: Historia, p. 537.]
Of himself ' the least of
all on the mission ' there are few details.
He mentions that he visited the district
known as Delvin MacCoghlan and refers
to large numbers of confessions, Mass
celebrated in the open, and to the reconciliation
of many lapsed Catholics.
The setting up of a hospice in Limerick
necessitated Father Robert's transfer to
his native city. O Connell records that
the friar set out for Limerick in 1633, [note: ibid. p. 383.]
taking farewells on the way of the people
in the various places in which he had
worked. They wept at his departure;
Father O Connell does not fail to note
the parallelism with St. Paul's farewell
to the Ephesians.
We have seen that Father Robert was
in Cork in 1637. How long he remained
is impossible to determine. It seems
likely, however, that the Inchiquin
ravages in Cork in 1641 drove him to
the country near Mallow. It was at
this period that he suffered imprisonment
twice, firstly at Mallow and later at
Cork. The last notice of the faithful
missionary in the O Connell MS is the
record of his death at Limerick in December,
1645. [note: 14 ibid. p. 540.]
For the context in the 'Historia' we
are grateful to Father O Connell. The
portrait of the first superior of the Cork
hospice is under an awning of personal
admiration, the more profound because
nowhere expressed. We are allowed to
see in Father Michael the personification
of Irish Catholics in the seventeenth
century for whom the distinction between
Faith and Fatherland hardly existed.
Having spent twelve years in France,
Father O Coileain returned to Ireland.
He was the companion of Father Robert
Maison d'arret, Charleville, France
Formerly convent of Irish Capuchins (1615-1683)
Comyn when the little chapel in Blackamoor
Lane was set up. He was admitted
to the secret councils of the
southern Irish confederates. On their
behalf he pleaded at the French court
for assistance. Again returning to Cork
he saw the blackened ruin of what was
once the chapel. Father Michael sought
the place whence he once left to join the
Capuchins, his native west Cork. Furtive
glimpses of an aging but tireless missionary
are given us. Almost the last
observation made by Father O Connell
might have been written at the head of
the chapter-' Michael went down to
the battle.' [note: 15 ibid. p. 642.]
Looking down a perspective
of three centuries we see the
retreating figure. It is Herculean.
Michael O Coileain or Collins was a
native of Carbery, in west Cork. From
the Archbold and O Connell MSS it
appears that he joined the Capuchins in
the Walloon province. With a number
of other volunteers for the newly-founded
Irish mission he arrived in Charleville in
the year 1618. [note: 16 Archbold : Historie, p. 4 ; 0 Connell : Historia,
p. 209. The transfer was authorised by letter
of the Father General dated 2 July, 1618.]
He was then a cleric.
We have been unable to discover the year
of his ordination. The next reference
informs us that he was still in Charleville
in 1631. He was a priest and O Connell
adds that Father O Coileain was accustomed
to preach in French. [note: Historia, p. 459. Arch. de Prop. Fid. I. Hibernia
vol. 294. f. 265. Here there is a letter signed
' Fr. Michael, Hibernus Capucinus indignus '
-dated 4 November, 1631.]
In 1633, he departed from France for
Ireland travelling through England on
his way. The extract from the' Historia'
already quoted gives the circumstances
of his introduction to the hazardous life
of a Capuchin missionary. After some
pastoral work in and around Dublin he
was selected to accompany Father Comyn
to Cork in 1637. [note: Historia, p. 457.]
In the following
years he was a witness of the gradual
alignment of forces which were consolidated
at Kilkenny in 1642. The
story of Father O Coileain is part of the
pattern of these eventful years.
We shall not pause to consider the
series of happenings which galvanised the
Anglo-Irish and native Irish to concerted
action in 1642. In October of that
year the Confederate Assembly at Kilkenny
represented a united Ireland resolved
to speak the only idiom possible
to meet imminent perils-force of arms.
The presence of Scarampi, and later, of
Rinuccini, gave a deep consciousness
of what was at stake-a common Catholic
heritage.
What of Cork and its Capuchin hospice
during these momentous years?
As early as 1641 Inchiquin declared
for the royal interest and seized Cork,
which became a haven of refuge for the
planters of Cork and Kerry. A hosting
of the O Longs, the O Reas, the O Learys
and the O Sullivans from West Cork
was joined by the Barrys, the Roches,
and the MacCarthys. The united forces
made their headquarters at Rochfordstown,
a short distance outside Cork,
and in March, under the command of
Donaugh MacCarthy, Lord Muskerry, laid
siege to the city. The issue was never
in doubt. Superiority in weapons and
continuity of supplies enabled the garrison
to withstand all attacks. Finally,
the besieged took the initiative and the
siege was raised after three weeks. But
disaster had overtaken the little friary.
It was destroyed- probably in one of
the many skirmishes in the vicinity of
Elizabeth Fort. Father Comyn, as we
have seen, sought the refuge offered
in the friendly areas of North Cork.
Another task was given Father 0
Coileain.
A month later, in April, 1642, the
confederate chiefs of the south determined
to seek aid in the form of arms
and money on the continent. The
emissary chosen was Father O Coileain.
His familiarity with France was an
admirable qualification-readily recognised-
for his letter of authorisation
was signed by each of the confederate
leaders. [note: ibid. p. 500. Arch. de Prop. Fid. III. Hibernia,
vol. 298, f. 956.]
The letter described Father
O Coileain as superior of his Order in
Cork and invested him with plenary
powers to approach Louis XIII and
Cardinal Richelieu. The 'Historia' records
a stay of twelve months in France when,
his mission accomplished, Father Michael
returned to Ireland. Father Barnaby
Barrewell, the Irish superior, was released
from prison in 1644. He directed
Father O Coileain to return to the scenes
of his former labours in and around
Cork. [note: Historia, pp. 523-24.]
The friar was not left in doubt as to
the complexion of events in the city.
The mass eviction of Catholics marked
the first great rupture of Catholic life
in Cork. The contemporary account is
memorable:
' Three cannon shots gave the signal
for departure. The spectacle was dreadful
to mortal eyes but glorious in the
sigh-: of heaven. Before the third gunpeal
the body of citizens began the
journey into exile : mothers with their
infants, grave elders and their families
-all scattered through the fields.
Bearing with them their household
goods they elected to be faithful to the
Faith of their fathers rather than to a
mere worldly portion. The security
of morning gave place to the misery of
evening.' [note: Lynch: De Praes. Hib. (ed. O Doherty), vol.
II., p. 152.]
The bearers of many names associated
with the Capuchin advent to Cork were
among the procession which filed through
the present Barrack Street to where are
now the western suburbs of the city. It
is possible to identify many of them : the
Coppingers, the Roches, the Martells,
the Sarsfields, the Vardons. A straggling
group, led by Dr. William Thirrey, Bishop
of Cork, made its way eastwards along
the coast to Cloyne. A halt was made
two days later in the shadow of the
round tower, where food and relief were
given to the aged and infirm.
The achievements of sublime courage
when the great deeps of life cast up their
terrors were seen on the roads leading
from Cork on the long evenings of June,
1644.
The temptation to trace the Capuchin
association with the Confederation of
Kilkenny must be resisted. The letter
of four Irish 'bishops, meeting at Galway
on 7 November, 1648, in the presence of
Rinuccini, informed the Holy See of the
outstanding labours of the Capuchins in
preserving the piety and fidelity of the
Catholics of Ireland. [note: Historia, pp. 571-73; Commentarius Rinuccinianus,
III, pp. 574-75.]
Another Capuchin of Cork exemplified
the truth of a recurring phrase in the
'Historia' : 'having once put his hand to
the plough he did not look backwards.'
During the brief respite of the Ormond
Peace in 1649 a scion of an old Cork
mercantile family, Father Bartholomew
Martell, who had barely escaped with his
life during the Inchiquin expulsion, returned
to Cork and rehabilitated the
little friary. [note: Historia, p. 576.]
Once again the Capuchin
rule was lived ' without the south gate
of Cork.' The interval was brief. A
new terror stalked the land. Its name
was Cromwell.
The garrisons in Shandon Castle and
Elizabeth Fort revolted in favour of
Cromwell on 16 October, 1649. Then
the mantling darkness of hatred and
persecution fell on the old walled city
of Cork. Perils as yet unexperienced
awaited the faithful adherents of the
old faith.
The Civil Survey catalogued the process
of extirpation in 1654. The stone
houses abutting the city walls were made
tenantless; the Coppingers, the Kents,
the Galways, the Martells, the Roches,
the Sarsfields made way for the Cromwellian
adventurers, the Tuckeys, the
Kifts, the Knapps, the Lavitts, the
Crones. Catholic remnants in the narrow
lanes within and without the city heard
the Puritan orators proclaim the gloomy
message of predestination and declare
the theocratic mission of the Lord
Protector.
Once again the Capuchin hospice, its
books and furniture, were destroyed.
Father Bartholomew Martell returned to
Charleville and Father O Coileain sought
the security of the De Courcey country. [note: Historia, p. 642. Father Bartholomew Martell
returned to Charleville in 1650.]
The O Connell MS does not carry ,
us beyond this point. We have now to
rely on information gleaned from the
Irish Capuchin friary, Bar-sur-Aube, France.
Irish friars lived here from 1683 to 1790.
archives of the Congregation of Propaganda,
Rome. We meet the Irish
Capuchins almost in ambush; the unseen
and unfelt snares sometimes seize their
victims. Some of the most glorious
chapters of Irish Capuchin history are
still unwritten. To us the privilege
has been given to tell in part for the
first time the spiritual odyssey of the
m1ssionaries.
Concern for the welfare of the friars
in Ireland increased in Charleville and
in Rome. At the request of the commissary-
general, Father Christopher
Kearney, the Congregation granted a sum
of money for the support of the Capuchin
missionaries in Ireland. Brother Edward
Fleming was sent by Father Kearney to
dispense the needed aid in Ireland and
to bring back reports from the friars.
Brother Edward landed in Cork on 10
December, 1655, and immediately set
out for the - country around Kinsale to
find Father O Coileain. The report of
Brother Edward, written at Nantes on
14 March, I656, was forwarded to the
Father Guardian at Charleville. It tells
of the meeting with the missionary.
' Reverend Father,
To you, to whom I wrote when
I landed in the city of Cork on
December 10, I send greetings.
I am sure that you will welcome
an account of the conduct of my
affairs. With the greatest sincerity
at my command I submit it to you.
Having reached the aforesaid city
from England I set out forthwith for
Kinsale that I might discover the
hiding place of Father Michael. I
had to go further, however, to the
country of Lord Courcey, where after
a journey of some fifteen leagues I
met him.
I stayed with him for three or four
days. Nothing could have been more
inspiring than the devotion of the
country-folk who follow Father Michael
from place to place that they might
receive the Sacraments at his hands,
and to such an extent that in whatsoever
place he tarries-whatever day
it may be-is reckoned a feastday.
Nevertheless, he celebrates Mass only
in huts, because to do so in private
houses would lead to the detection of
the owner and of all assisting. It is
his regular practice to offer Mass twice
daily before sunrise, at which only a
small number is present-there is
danger from false brethren ! On such
occasions he administers the Sacraments
of Penance and the Blessed
Eucharist to all.
He suffers many hardships ; indeed,
he assured me that often he is unable
to obtain hop-brew to quench his
thirst. He continues, however, to
enjoy good health and he seems so
active and fit that he appeared to me
like another Daniel. He was in need
of funds and accordingly I gave him
two and a half pistoles from my
resources.' [note: 25 Arch. de Prop. III. Hib., vol. 298, f. 999.]
Leaving the neighbourhood of Kinsale,
Brother Edward made his way to Youghal
to meet Father Gregory Conroy, who
was hiding somewhere in the vicinity.
The letter continues :
'Leaving Kinsale, I returned to
Cork and from there I went to Youghal.
At last, about two miles from the
town, near the house of Thomas Walsh
at Piltown, I met him. He was in a
cave so small that it was impossible to
stand erect within. At my first meeting with him I was unable to restrain
my tears of compassion. I found him
lying on a little straw, resting after his
nocturnal labours in missionary work
: he had celebrated Masses before
dawn in a place nearby... I remained
with him two days and witnessed the
extraordinary fervour of the people
who flocked to him to receive the
Sacraments. He never spends two
days in the same place and has a
circuit of about twenty leagues for his
missionary zeal. He is dressed like a
typical countryman. He wears a cap
of poor texture and a long garment.
He allows his beard to grow full
length. His whole demeanour is not
that of an ordinary man; he bears
himself as a true apostle. For those
reasons he enjoys a widespread esteem
and more than I can explain. Thence
I set out for Limerick.' [note: ibid.]
Brother Edward conveyed to Father
Michael the command to make a personal
report. Father O Coileain's letter,
written in December, 1655, was forwarded
by Father Gregory to the commissary
at Charleville on 15 January,
1656. The report made subsequently
by Brother Edward was the basis of the
Relatio of 1656. The letter of Father
Michael was included. It reads :
'Although it has been my wish that
nobody should know of my labours
and difficulties nor of their fruits but
to leave all to God, still in consequence
of the instruction brought to me by
Brother Edward, I now manifest them
to you, reverend Director and Father.
My district is comprised of Killerton
and Courceys, containing six or seven
parishes in addition to those parts
south of Kinsale and adjacent to
Bandon bridge.
In those places I usually labour
both by day and by night, and there
is none to help me in the areas occupied
by the English. Every day is like a
holiday on account of the numbers
of people who come to me whenever
I visit any of those places and to whom
I administer the Sacraments. Occasionally I visit Cork, Muskerry, Ibane.
and west Carbery, meeting dangers by
day and by night-particularly during
the night there are risks due to the
presence of so many enemies in the
English garrisons. I am wont to sleep
in some smoke-filled cabin, lying on
straw. I live like the very poor on
roots, cabbage, herbs, oaten bread
and a little milk.
I am beginning to fail in my
strength. My sight is very weak and
I am troubled with my feet. Otherwise
I would be fairly well if I had the
necessary food and some clothes. I
dare not go to the houses of the well-to-
do, except very rarely, lest our
cause should suffer hurt.' [note: ibid. f. 998 and f. 1013. Killerton= Kilbrittain,
Co. Cork.]
Father O Coileain survived the Cromwellian
persecutions. Although official
records do not refer to him again, his
name appears in a vastly different context. 
[note: Collins: journal of Cork Hist. and Arch. Society,
XXXIX. no. 150. 1934.]
The will of Daniel Mac Owen
MacSwyny, who died at Kilmurry, near
Macroom, Co. Cork, contains a bequest
of " six shillings to Father Michael
O Cullane, the Capusian fryer." The
will is dated 1667.
A statement on Capuchin missionary
work in the Irish province lists the
names of friars who were active in Ireland
in 1669. [note: 29 Arch. de Prop. Fid. Ser. rifer. Irlanda, vol. 2.,
ff. 187-202.]
The name of Father Michael
does not appear. We conclude, therefore,
that between the years 1667 and
1669 the pioneer Capuchin of the Cork
foundation passed to his eternal rest.
We are justified, too, in concluding from
his last known whereabouts that he was
buried in the ruined Franciscan friary
at Kilcrea, some nine miles to the west
of Cork.
The events of 1660 brought fitful
gleams of toleration to the Irish Catholics.
Despite the grudging redress made to a
few Catholic families, the Puritan
hegemony in Cork was not seriously
disturbed. Capuchin friars made furtive
visits to the scenes of their labours, but
there is no evidence of a restored hospice.
A document in the archives of the
Congregation of Propaganda summarises
a provincial visitation made in l671. [note: 30 Arch. de Prop. Scr. rifer. nelle Cong. 13 Lugilio 31 Agosto, 1671, vol. 429.]
There were fourteen missionaries in Ireland
of whom two were in Cork. Their
names are given: R Pater Michael de
Momonia and R Pater Patritius de
Momonia. They are easily identified :
Father Michael O Keeffe and Father
Patrick O Grady.
Their story is, in truth, a synthesis of
Franciscan piety-a succession of perplexities
against which ordinary mortals
dragged out a harassed existence. To
the unwise it all seemed folly ; to those
who possessed the Franciscan vision the
shrivelling of the flesh mattered nothing.
Only meagre details concerning Father
Michael O Keeffe have come to light.
John O Keeffe, a native of Cork, was
received into the Capuchins at Charleville
on 3 April, 1635 ; his name in
religion was Michael. [note: 31 Book of all the Vestitions and Professions made among us Irishe Capucins in the Commissariate of Charleville (1652-77). Archives departementales de l' Aube, Troyes, H.I.]
The narrative
of his activities shows the effects of the
Cromwellian persecutions.
'Father Michael O Keeffe works
in that part of the mission since 1663
where a greater persecution and a
greater hatred of Catholics still persist.
He shows that the fruits of his efforts
are not to be despised. He has absolved
twenty-nine heretics of both
sexes; to many others he has made
manifest the error of their ways so
that nothing deters them from embracing
the true religion save the dread
of persecution and misery to which
Catholics are subjected. Frequently
at Eastertide and on other greater
feasts he assists the secular priests,
at one time hearing two hundred
confessions, at another, three hundred
confessions. In these and on other
missionary occasions (sad to relate)
how often and how many has he
found-people of advanced years who
have scarcely ever received the Sacraments
save either unworthily or invalidly.
Accordingly he does not admit to
Holy Communion those who have
received Penance without a foregoing
exhortation and instruction on worthy
reception. The result is that he is
held in such affection by the people
that they come in crowds to him in the
mountains and in the woods; in teaching
the word of God he has no subject
matter other than the Creed, the
Lord's Prayer, the keeping of the Ten
Commandments, and the manner of
receiving the Sacraments worthily.
With his own hands he has poured the
waters of Baptism on many hundreds
of infants, never, indeed, without the
permission of the parish priests (where
they exist), save in cases of grave
need. He has administered the Last
Sacraments to no fewer dying people
of all ages. He is the greatest consolation
to both soul and body." [note: 32 Arch. de Prop. Fid. Ser. rifer. Irlanda, vol. 2
ff. 187-202.]
The date and circumstances of Father
O Keeffe's death are not known.
Sources have yielded more details
concerning Father Patrick O Grady.
Henry O Grady was born in 1626 in
the townland of Ballymichael, near
Macroom, Co. Cork. He was received
into the Irish Capuchins on 15 December,
1652, taking the name Patrick in religion.
Exactly a year later he was professed. [note: Book of all the Vestitions, etc.]
Some four years after ordination he
came to Ireland and in accordance with
what seemed a settled policy of sending
missionaries to their native places Father
O Grady reached Cork in 1660. A report
by Father Barnaby Barnewell, vice-prefect
of the Irish province, written in
Dublin on 22 December, 1669, exemplifies
the hunted existence of a regular priest
in Ireland during the decade following
the restoration of the Stuarts.
' Father Patrick O Grady of Cork
has been labouring for nine years on
the missions. In the vineyard of the
Lord he has endured many cruel and
severe hardships. His toil has borne
happy fruits. Scarcely had he arrived
in the province when he was relentlessly
pursued by the heretics. At
length he was taken and put into
prison. After almost a whole year he
was thrown out almost dead with
hunger and fetor-sick and barely
alive. Restored in health somewhat
he renewed his activity and journeyed
through the country. He restored to
a better way of life many who through
fear had feigned heresy. Others he
encouraged with faith and constancy.
He brought one hundred and twenty
heretics into the fold of the church.
'Once when he was lying hidden
in some rural place and violent persecutions
were raging against the shepherds
of Christ he was the only priest
surviving in an area of many parishes ;.
all the others had been dispersed.
He attended to these parishes by day
and by night, never shirking toil or
danger. He celebrated Masses daily
and administered the Sacraments.
After some years a measure of toleration
ensued and the parochial clergy
returned to their flocks. He entered.
the city of Cork where because of his
former imprisonment and outstanding
zeal he was known to almost everyone.
His first service was to the
Catholics. He composed their differences
and dissensions. He abolished
rancour and bound them-one to the
other-in bonds of mutual charity
and peace.
He had a special compassion for
the imprisoned. He visited them
frequently and administered to them
the food of salvation. For the past
five years, single-handed, he has sustained
those who have been condemned
to death. In discharging these duties
he does not go unrewarded. Quite
often he has been spurned as a nuisance.
Many times he has been given an
honourable reception-with blows and
lashes. He has been violently ejected.
He has been pitched down the steps
which he had so toilsomely climbed.' [note: Arch. de Prop.. Fid. Ser. rifer. Irlanda, vol. 2. 
ff. 187-202.]
The circumstances of Father O Grady's
death are narrated in the ' Synopsis.'
The heroic missionary was again arrested
and sent captive to England. He was
moved ' from prison to prison and
finally exiled where he gained the merited
Crown of martyrdom.' The Donnelly
MS states that he died at Lille in 1690,
-in his sixty-fourth year.
There is another record of Father
O Grady's death in which his anabasis
appears to hold title-deeds to martyrdom.
Father Bernardi, who accompanied
the Father General on a visitation of the
French province in July-September, 1694,
made a note of what he had seen in the
refectory at Bar-sur-Aube. There were
six mural paintings, the first of which
was that of Father Francis Nugent ; the
-others were of Irish friars who 'but
three years ago, it is piously believed,
Obtained the crown of martyrdom.'
'The fourth is Father Patrick of
Cork, preacher, who after having
suffered for a long time with indomitable
patience the sufferings of painful
imprisonment in various places to
which he was brought in chains,
changing him from prison to prison
until finally he ended his life on the
car on which he was being conducted
to the prison of London. [note: Viaggi, II. pp. 396 etc. quoted by Padre Sisto da Pisa: Storia dei Cappuccini Toscani, pp. 59-61.]
In recent years a poem bearing the
:signature ' Patricius Michaelipolitanus,
Capucinus,' amongst a collection in the
British Museum has been identified as
the work of Father Patrick O Grady. [note: 36 Brit. Mus. 11474 h. 27. The title is Vers composez par un Pere Capucin Irlandis Qui a traduit en Anglois les Dialogues de la Pierre de Touche Politique de Mr. Le Noble, et qu'il a mis a la teste de sa Traduction imprimee a Limerik des le mois de juillet 1690. Michaelipolitanus
is a compound of Ballymichel, Co. Cork- the birthplace of Father 0 Grady. The verses are signed Fr. Pat. Mich. Sac. Cap. Anno MDCXC.]
Nothing more is known of him. His
brief history remains, to quote Francis
Thompson, ' to beat at our clay-shattered
doors.'
The closing of an epoch in Irish
Capuchin history had its fitting climax.
Sound and fury gave bracing contact
with the band of pioneers-there could
have been no more heroic occasion than
at the sundown of Irish hopes. On the
field of Aughrim, somewhere at the foot
of Kilcommodan hill amongst the tangled
mass of slain lay the body of Father John
Baptist Gibbons of Cork. A brief notice
in the ' Synopsis ' tells us of him :
'As a Court preacher, he induced
many by his labour, zeal and piety to
embrace the Catholic Faith.
From what he accomplished during
the period he was with the army we
can readily perceive how calm was his
demeanour, how valiantly he countered
heresy, how he was consumed with
apostolic fervour, how sterling his
devotion to the Faith. how he yearned
for martyrdom.
While campaigning in the cause of
the Lord he was in the van against
the enemies of his Faith and country.
Fearlessly he bore the image of the
Crucified aloft to inspire those who
fought against his motherland and her
laws. He yielded himself to Christ ;
he fell in the welter of his own blood.
He arose, we devoutly hope, to gain
eternal happiness. He was killed In
his fortieth year, his fourteenth In
religion, at the battle of Aughrim in
Ireland, 1691. '[note: 37 Donnelly : Synopsis, pp. 288-89. cf. Archbold : Historie- Catalogus omnium fratrum Missionis Hiberniae Capuccinorum ab anno 1625 usque ad annum Domini 1693. The reception of Brother John Baptist Gibbons is found in a note appended to the Book of all the Vestitions etc. Archives de l'Aube, liasse II. H.I. A laybrother, Brother James 0 Reilly, was killed with Father Gibbons. Concerning special position of Capuchins at the Court of James II, see Letter to Clarendon in Rawl A. 139b in Analecta Hib. (1930) vol. I. p. 34.]
 
So far as it has been possible for the
present writer the following names from
the ' Book of Vestitions ' complete the list
of Capuchins who were either natives of
Cork or associated with the Cork hospice
during the early years of its existence. [note: The Book of all the Vestitions etc. gives official
records of receptions and professions from 1623 to 1668. A few professions of the years 1669-75 are given. The list in Archbold's Historie is incomplete.]
John Garvan In religion, Father John Baptist ; received in Charleville,
31 August, 1629. Died in Limerick, December,
1650.
Stephen Martell In religion, Father Bartholomew; received in Charleville
4 October, 1636. Died 1679.
Maurice Fitzgerald In religion, Father George ; received in Charleville,
5 March, 1643. Died in Little Brittany, September,
1649.
Garret Nangle In religion, Father Matthew; received in Charleville,
8 September, 1657. Died in Chinon, 1672.
James Nugent In religion, Father Peter; received in Charleville, 26
September, 1669.
Daniel Hurley In religion Brother Eustace ; received in Charleville,
15 June, 1638. A laybrother. Died 1654 [note: The portrait of Father Nugent is the last of
the mural paintings noted by Father Bernardi
- cf. note 35. He wrote : ' The last is Father
Peter Nugent of Cork, preacher, who after
having suffered for four years in the dreadful
prison of London, there bound in iron and
in chains, ended his life.'
Brother Eustace Hurley was received m
Charleville on 15 June, 1638. He came to
Ireland in 1643 and was in the Limerick hospitium
until it was destroyed in 1651. In the
next year he was tried in Limerick but acquitted.
He returned to his native Carbery in west
Cork to join Father O Coileain. The fact of his
death in the winter of 1654 was communicated
in a letter written by Father Gregory to the
Father Guardian of Charleville. cf. Comment.
Rinucc. V, 239-40 ; Historia, p. 642.]
Father Dominic Douly, parish priest
of Cahirlog, on the plateau to the northeast
of Cork, visualised a fresh and
vigorous jointure when he wrote his last
will and testament on 11 October, 1689.
He bequeathed the sum of two pounds
' to the Dominicans, Franciscans,
Capuchins, Jesuits and Augustinians of
Cork.' [note: 40 Carrigan : Journal of Cork Hist. and Arch.
Society, I. V., no. 39, 1898., p. 213.]
It was the annus mirabilis for Jacobite
Cork. Cheering crowds at World's End
danced with joy when James Stuart and
Patrick Sarsfield landed at Kinsale in
March. A poet-brother of a later bishop
of Cork stood among the waving populace
to acclaim a Catholic king when he
walked from the Dominican priory on
St. Mary's Isle to the Franciscan church
at the north gate bridge of the city. [note: Diarmuid Mac Sheain Bhuidhe Mac Carrthaigh.]
Father Douly did not live to see a
nation in delirium. Boyne and Limerick
-and James Stuart, the last Catholic
monarch, once again ate the bread of
exile. Some months later the military
genius of Marlborough had a minor
triumph when he crushed the last resistance
of Cork. A breathing-space-and
Ireland entered on the starless midnight
of the penal days.
The poet stayed to see the genial
sanctities of the Dominicans, Franciscans,
Capuchins, Jesuits and Augustinians wilt
and wither:
Cá ngabhann Ráif 'sa ghárda mhalluighthe
Printísigh diablaidhe na cathrach
Do stiall gach aontaobh seipeil bheannuighthe,
Ag dibirt cleire De 's n-argain ?
(Where is Ralph going and his cursed
guard-
The damned apprentices of the city
Who have destroyed holy sanctuaries on
all sides,
Plundering the priests and driving them
to exile ?)
For those who remained the only
refuge was in the caverns of the spirit.
IV
The Cromwellian-Williamite oligarchy,
the Corporation and Common Council of
Cork, were quick to express agreement
with Bishop Dopping of Meath-faith
must not be kept with Catholics. The
Deanes, the Ballards, the Knapps, the
Slocombs, the Webbers, having duly
returned thanks because it ' pleased
the Almighty God in His infinite mercy
to deliver this city and the Protestant
inhabitants thereof out of the hands and
from under the tyranny of their malicious,
implacable enemies, the papists,' ensured
that all Jacobite freemen were deprived
of their rights. A presentment of the
Assizes that all Catholics should live
outside the fortifications of the city was
a hint of greater outlawries to come.
At this stage it becomes difficult to
maintain contact with the Capuchin
missionaries of Cork. Matters are made
more complex by reason of the fact that
the Irish Capuchin house at Charleville
was transferred by the French government
in 1685 to the French province;
the Irish friars took up residence in the
convents at Bar-sur-Aube and Vassy.
Records of early receptions and professions
in these latter houses are missing.
[note: 42 The records of Bar-sur-Aube begin with the year
1736, of Vassy with the year 1754.]
Tracing the Capuchins, therefore,
during the first decades of the eighteenth
century has its moments of suspense
and exhilaration. Recurring penal enactments
thinned the number of the priests.
Smith tells us that in 1698 there were
one hundred and twenty-seven clergy
in the county and city of Cork ; seventy-five
of that number who were regulars
were shipped out of Ireland. Six years
later all priests were compelled to register
and thus we discover almost the first
figure to be held fast in the cordage of
penal legislation was a Capuchin. Father
Christopher Martin declared that he
lived ' out of the south gate of Corke.' [note: Buckley Journal of Cork Hist. and Arch. Soc.
VI. no. 45, 1900.]
The merest details have been preserved
concerning him. It is certain
that he was a member of the Limerick
community and was taken prisoner in
1698. Later, he was transferred to Cork
to share imprisonment with the bishop
of Cork, Dr. John Baptist Sleyne. In
1708, a warrant for the expulsion of Dr.
Sleyne and Father Martin was forwarded
by the presiding judges at the Cork
Assizes to the Lords Justices in Dublin
Castle. It seems that friendly interests
intervened on Father Martin's behalf
and secured his release. He remained
in Cork-in the Capuchin atmosphere
of the south gate vicinity. When he
registered in 1704 he stated that his age
was sixty and that he had been ordained.
in Brittany.
More trials awaited him. Rowland
Delahoyde, Mayor of Cork, reported in
October, 1708, that Father Martin was.
under arrest in the gaol of Cork. Nothing
more is known of him. [note: 44 Eurke : Irish Priests in Penal Days, pp. 139,
140, 144, 178, 391.]
In face of mounting penal enactments
the Franciscan pattern was not obliterated
in the parish of St. Finbarr. Its manifestations
bewildered James Osburne, a
magistrate of Cork:
' The very extraordinary devotions,
fastings and penances among the Irish
all over the county, remarkable even.
in this city, is so much that many
hundreds of them have been seen by
Protestants of good credit going to
churches every day, barefooted, yea,.
some who have not been able to stir
out of doors or their beds for a long
time are forced to comply with these
injunctions. A very sensible honourable
gentleman who saw many of
them told me upon enquiry what all
this was for, was answered that they
were commanded to do it for the good
of their souls [note: ibid. p. 380.]
The phenomenon was not short-lived;
an investigation was set on foot. Why
was there such bracing air in the uplands
of the soul of Cork ? For the parish of
St. Finbarr, the Mayor, Randall Westropp
gave five adequate reasons. The catalogue is precious.

Colman Sarsfield A reputed registered priest resides in Upper Douglas
Road in the south suburbs of said city.
Michael Sarsfield A reputed popish priest reported to be a curate to said
Colman Sarsfield; resides near St. Stephen's Hospital
in said city.
Gorman A reputed popish friar resides at a reputed popish
friary on Dunscombe's Marsh in said city.
Bryan Gallagher A reputed popish priest resides In Gallway's Lane in
south suburbs of said city.
John Haly A reputed popish priest resides at a reputed popish
friary in south suburbs of said city. [note: 46 ibid. Father Colman Sarsfield was parish priest
of St. Finbarr's, Cork, 1695-1752. Father
Meehan or Michael Sarsfield was his cousin.
He died in 1762. Father Thaddeus O Gorman
was a Franciscan. A Jesuit of the same name
was in Cork at that time. Father Gallagher
was a secular priest.]

The final name must be read as a
Directive. It assures us that the stream
of Capuchin tradition was not impeded ;
on the contrary, it had sought out its old
windings in and around Blackamoor
Lane. A friary of some sort was there
in 1741, but so ill-seeming was its mien
that the Mayor and Sheriffs were satisfied
with the breath of rumour.
It is evident that to the City Elders,
foregathered in the court of d'oyer
hundred, there could have been no
relationship between Francis Bernardone
and residents of Blackamoor Lane.
Father Haly, like St. Francis, was original.
The Capuchin friar had only contempt
for the thunderings of Parliaments, Lords
Justices, Common Councils, Mayors and
Sheriffs.
John Haly, in religion Father James,
was passed for reception in 1721 in his
twenty-fourth year. [note: Book of Consultations of Custody of Irish Capuchins.
The MS is in the Archives departementales de l' Aube. There is a copy in Capuchin
provincial archives.]
Father Haly came under official notice
again in l766. In the parliamentary
returns of that year it was disclosed that
Father James Haly and Father Bryan
McDonald dwelt in the parish of St.
Nicholas ' which among the papists is
part of the parish of St. Finbarry's.' [note: Carrigan: journal of Cork Hist. and Arch. Soc.
XV. no. 81, 1909.]
The emphasis again is on Blackamoor
Lane ! Barely an arm-stretch in width
it still holds what is traditionally regarded
as the remnant of Father Haly's
friary. On a blackened wall of a forge
may be seen concave outlines of a
reredos. From the dim recess come the
rhythmic strokes of a blacksmith's
hammer. One of the occasional passersby,
to whom the Capuchins of a past
generation mean much, admits that for
him the anvils of the brain are silent.
Father Arthur O Leary
He burst on Ireland like a thunderclap.
A nation in thrall looked with
amazement at the strangest of anomalies-
one of the proscribed demanding freedom
from religious and civil disabilities.
With tongue and pen he pleaded the
cause of the voiceless thousands; for
a time it seemed as though the mantle
of Swift had fallen on his shoulders.
When a clerically-garbed figure made
his way towards the Exchange for the
opening session of the Volunteer Convention
in 1783 a deep swell of voices
from serried ranks shouted the name
of the anomaly-O Leary! A Capuchin
friar from a backlane of Cork was the
idol of the hour.
Arthur O Leary had vivid memories
of the days of his youth in west Cork.
He saw the declension of his race under
the blight of the penal code. Political
and religious servitude had sown the
seeds of a noble discontent in an impressionable
mind. He returned from France
in 1771 to Cork to fret at the grave
evils weighing on Irish Catholics. The
wretched building which served as a
friary in Blackamoor Lane was an unpromising
forum for one whose mind
circled in the wide orbit of causes and
principles.
Yet the unpredictable happened. A
new church was built-it stands to
the present day. The squat square building
was the scene of Father O Leary's
earliest demands for emancipation. Its
tiny limits could not contain the number
who flocked to hear the vibrant appeals
of a Capuchin priest. A local controversy
with a rationalistic writer showed
the extraordinary talents of Father
O Leary as a pamphleteer; he was able
to reach a far greater public. Pamphlet
followed pamphlet and there was a
stirring among the people. The voice
from America which shouted liberty
was re-echoed by a ' poor friar, buried
between salt-houses and stables.'
He did not aim at the liberty of the
American colonists. Father O Leary's
ideals were expressed in less expansive
terms:
' Let not religion, the sacred name
of religion, which even in the face
of an enemy discovers a brother, be
any longer a wall of separation to
keep us asunder : though it has often
been perverted to the worst of purposes,
yet it is easy to reconcile it
with every social blessing.'
Almost all his writings were variations
of the theme. The phenomena of religious
intolerance were only too familiar in
their daily effect on the thousands
huddled in the narrow lanes and alleys
of the south parish of Cork. The Capuchin
of Blackamoor Lane analysed the
causes once again and determined to
rescue them from 'the Law's delay
and the proud man's contumely.' When
all O Leary's writings shall have been
forgotten, his essay on Toleration will
be remembered.
The terms of the Dungannon resolution
on emancipation were ordered and
argued on a higher and more speculative
plane :
' My design in the following sheets
is, to throw open the gates of civil
toleration for all Adam's children
whose principles are not inconsistent
with the peace of civil society, or
subversive of the rules of morality ;
to wrench, as far as in my power
lies, the poniard so often tinged with
human blood from the hand of persecution;
to sheathe the sword which
misguided zeal has drawn in defence
of the Gospel which recommends peace
and love ... .'
Father Theobald Mathew (marble) by John Hogan in the Capuchin Friary, Dublin
The people of Ireland, Catholics and
Protestants, vied with each other in
acclaiming Father O Leary. The
volunteers appointed him chaplain to
the corps known as the Irish brigade.
The citizens of Cork presented him with
a gold medal which bore the device of
a Capuchin friar crushing the monster
of intolerance and throwing open the
temple of freedom.
' A man of learning-a philosopher
-a Franciscan,' was Grattan's graceful
tribute to Father O Leary on 26 February,
1782. Yelverton was in agreement :
he placed the writings of the friar 'upon
a footing with the finest writers of the age. '
The sudden transfer to the chaplaincy
of the Spanish embassy in London in
1789 is an unexplained episode in the
career of Father O Leary. The testimony
of a contemporary pamphleteer throws
new light on the labours which absorbed
the last energies of the Capuchin. His
task in London was to preserve for the
Catholic Irish in the metropolis the
priceless heritage of Faith. Much will
be forgotten-and forgiven-in the hue
and sweetness of the lines of an anonymous
writer who saw an Irish Capuchin
instructing Irish children in London
in their native tongue.
'To the poor Irish Catholics of
St. Giles.
My dear Countrymen,
'What is this I hear of some among
you? That you send your children
to a school where your religion is
expressly hindered from being taught
them ....
' Have you forgotten the zealous
labours, the pious instructions of

Patrick Russell In religion, Father Gabriel, son of Samuel Russell and
Mary Haly, born March, 1746 ; received in Bar-sur-Aube
1767 ; professed 15 August, 1768.
Thomas Murray In religion, Father Clement, son of Timothy Murray
and Catherine Cronin of St. Finbarr's parish, Cork.
Received in Bar-sur-Aube 29 August, 1768 ; professed
30 August, 1769.
William Conway In religion, Father Bonaventure, son of James Conway
and Sarah Martin, SS. Peter and Paul's parish, Cork.
Received at Bar-sur-Aube 22 July, 1782. Ordained
at St. Malo in 1785. Died at Vassy 23 April, 1833.
James O Leahy In religion, Father Constantine, son of James O Leahy
and Margaret Gould of parish of St. Mary's, Shandon;
born 10 October, 1762. Received Bar-sur-Aube 22
August, 1782. Died in France 22 January, 1817.
Thomas Chinnery In religion, Father Nicholas, son of John Chinnery
and Mary O Meskill of Macroom. Born 7 August,
1783. Received in Vassy 3 November, 1783.
Edward Nugent In religion, Father Andrew, son of Luke Nugent and
Jane Mulligan, parish of Dalytown, Co Longford. Born
1742. Received at Bar-sur-Aube 23 September, 1759·
Appointed to Little Friary. Left Cork for New
York in 1785. Returned to France in 1790. Died
in France 1795.

Capuchin Church Cork

James Jones In religion, Father Justin, born of Robert Jones and
Catherine Duffy, parish of Dunshaughlin, Co. Meath.
Received at Bar-sur-Aube 29 July, 1768. Ordained
at Bayeaux. When anti-Catholic laws of Nova Scotia
were suspended in 1783 the Catholics of Halifax
petitioned Dr. Butler, Bishop of Cork, for a priest.
Father Jones left Cork in July 1785. Appointed
Vicar-General of Acadia in 1787. It was said that the
Acadians and Indian tribes 'loved him to adoration.'
Father Jones died in Dublin in 1805 while seeking
priests to help him in his mission. [note: Capuchin provincial archives. Record of reception and profession of Father Clement Murray is in Bibliotheque Municipal de la Ville de Bar-sur-Aube.]
your late venerated pastor, Father
O Leary, the pride and ornament of
his country, so often inculcated to
you in your own native tongue, that
you would mind your duty to God
and teach your children to serve Him
in the faith of the Catholic Church
and in obedience to your pastors.
'For the sake of God, for the sake
of Erin's isle, for the sake of Father
O Leary's memory, send your children
to the Catholic schools, to the schools
of your own clergy.
I remain, dear countrymen,
Your sincere friend and
well-wisher,
An Irish Roman
Catholic.' [note: Archives of Westminster Cathedral, Pamphlets
(771-1845), No. 16.]
The list printed on p. 196 includes all
the names of friars who were either natives
of Cork or associated with the Little
Friary during the eighteenth century.
Father Mathew
For obvious reasons we are accustomed
to re-create the vision of Francis against
the appealing background of the Umbrian
landscape. Franciscan history, however,
teaches that the permanence of the vision
owes little to time and circumstance.
The perception vouchsafed to an Irish
Capuchin had a setting far different
to that of the Fioretti; Father Mathew
beheld the vision in pure line and high
relief among the uninviting slums of
Cove Street.
There were fearless endeavours of
grace in the grim tenements and sordid
hovels before his coming. The south
Presentation convent, hard-by, fruitful
mother of a world-wide family, reminds
us that Nano Nagle once passed that
way. She climbed rickety stairs to visit
the aged and infirn1, to bring tidings
of joy to childhood in the narrow lanes
and alleys of Cove Street. It was thus
that she began her ascent of Carmel.
Not many years later a young Cork
girl, Mary Aikenhead, left her home
a few hundred yards away to begin
the religious life at the convent of
Micklegate Bar, York. Many times she
had passed through the same drop-scene
to enter Cove Street ; she saw what
Nano Nagle had seen. Composition of
place was easy when she dreamt of
healing the soul-withering, never very
remote from twisted and diseased bodies.
In these environs were born the spiritual
ideals which were crystallised in the
Irish Sisters of Charity. But the shining
hours came to Cove Street when a
follower of St. Francis took up his
abode there.
Then was the thirteenth century
chained to the nineteenth ! At Montefeltro
Francis preached on a couplet
borrowed from minstrelsy :
Tanto e il bene ch'aspetto
Ch'ogni pena m' e diletto.
Father Mathew shared the holy contagion.
His life-story was contained in
the Poverello's text : so great a glory
awaits me that every pain it costs is
a delight. When one visits Cove Street
six centuries seem an improbable fiction.
There are but few reminders of Father
Mathew in Cove Street today. The
barely decipherable words 'Horse
Repository ' tell us of the grand climax
of his apostolate : ' here goes in the
Name of God!'
In recent times we have missed the
old lady who for many years was
wont to visit on Wednesday afternoon
the same room where Father Mathew
prayed. She also spent hours in prayer.
She felt the truth proclaimed by another
womanly heart: 'He wiped more tears
from the face of women than any other
being on the globe but the Lord Jesus,
and thousands of lisping children will
bless the Providence that gave them
existence in the same age.'
Father Mathew's contemporaries in Blackamoor Lane
Daniel O Donovan In religion, Father Francis; born March, 1763. Provincial
1816-'19. Died 14 February, l821.

Edward Burke In religion, Father Augustine, born of Thomas Burke
and Anne Reynolds on 3 November, 1795· Received
in convent of SS. Justine and Rufina, Seville on 19
November, 1815. Died in Dublin l October, 1859.

John Mooney In religion, Father Patrick. Born in Dublin 4 May,
1798. Received in Seville 19 November, 1815. Member
of community in Little Friary l830-31.

Thomas Power In religion, Father Angelo. Received in Frascati on
19 July, 1826. Member of community of Little Friary,
l830-31. Died in Italy in 1843.

James O Riordan In religion, Father Louis. Born in parish of St.
Finbarr, Cork, in 1798. Received in Monte Pulciana,
Tuscany on 23 January, 1826. Appointed to Little
Friary 30 December, 1830. Guardian and Definitor
many times. Vice-Provincial 1853. Commissary
General 1855. Died in Cork of fever on 23 May, 1857.
Buried in St. Joseph's cemetery, Cork.

Denis Macleod In religion, Father Vincent, native of Cork. Received
in Frascati 19 July, 1828. Ordained in Pisa 29 May,
l83r. Guardian Little Friary 1842-48. Definitor
1836-52. Secretary to St. Patrick's orphanage for
sixteen years. There is a memorial to the memory of
his brother, Father Charles MacLeod in the cathedral,
Cork. The MacLeod family were related. to Marshal
Bugeaud, of French colonial fame.

George Brennan In religion, Father John. Born in Cork of George
Brennan and Margaret Dixon on 28 March, 1809.
Professed 26 April, 1829. Appointed to Little Friary
December, 1832. Guardian 1836-39. Definitor 1839-
49. There is a memorial to Father Brennan in St.
Finbarr's Church, Cork.

John O Connell In religion, Father Aloysius. Native of Cork. Professed
20 September, 1832. Appointed to Little
Friary in 1836. Provincial, January 1852. Transferred
to Melbourne in 1854. Died at Emerald Hill,
Melbourne 7 August, 1858.

John O Flynn In religion, Father Laurence. Born 1807. Appointed
to Little Friary 22 September, 1859. An accomplished
Irish scholar; member of Ossianic society for preservation
and publication of Irish MSS. Died 10 July
1863.

Jeremiah O Reilly. In religion, Father Joseph. Native of Cork. Received
Frascati 5 September, 1826. Guardian, Dublin friary
in 1836 and Kilkenny friary 1839. Transferred to
New Zealand in 1842. First resident priest in Wellington,
N.Z. Vicar-General of Wellington. Died July,
1880.

Thomas Connolly In religion, Father Louis. Native of Cork. Received
in Frascati in September, 1831. Ordained at Lyons
in 1838. Appointed to the Dublin friary. Transferred
to Canada in 1842. Appointed Bishop of
New Brunswick in 1852. Appointed Archbishop of
Halifax, N.S., in 1854. Took a prominent part at the
Vatican Council. Died at Halifax, 27 July, 1876 [note: Capuchin provincial archives. Records of professions
of Father Augustine Burke and Father
Patrick Mooney are in Libra de Recepciones
de los Novicios, 1714-94 (Seville).
Father Louis 0 Riordan was the writer's
great-uncle.
At a meeting of the New Zealand delegation,
under the chairmanship of the late Dr. Redwood,
Archbishop of Wellington, held during
the Eucharistic Congress in Dublin in 1932,
the story of Father Joseph O'Reilly's pioneer
work for the Faith in New Zealand was told.]

Much sundry information bearing on Catholic life in nineteenth century Cork is found
in the MS Book of the Community of the South Friary, Blackamoor Lane.[note: Capuchin provincial archives.] The following
brief extracts are of more than passing interest.
1839 The Capuchins supply a chaplain to the Sisters of Mercy. The Mercy convent
in the above record was the foundation made by Mother Mary Ward in No. 4
Rutland Street in 1837. It was vacated in 1852 when the community moved
to St. Marie's of the Isle. The Capuchin chaplaincy ceased in 1846 when it devolved
on the Rev. A. Maguire, brother of Father Mathew's first biographer.
1842 Jubilee for Spanish church. Number of communicants at the Little Friary from
May 22 to July 3 numbered 7,600.
1843 November 19. O Connell's day.
1845 January. Chaplaincy at Mrs. Bullen's began. The Bullen residence was on the
South Mall. Denis Bullen, son of Dr. and Mrs. Bullen, was secretary to the citizens'
committee of the proposed Queen's College, Cork.
1847 March 17. St. Patrick's Day. On this and on the two following days public
prayers were said by direction of the bishop for mitigation of the famine; prayers
were Rosary, Penitential Psalms, and Litany of Saints.
1847 April 1. The Right Rev. John Murphy, Bishop of Cork, died.
May 5. Parish priests assembled to nominate three names to be forwarded to
Holy See as fitting persons for selection as bishop. Mass of Holy Ghost was sung
by Archbishop Slattery. On the scrutiny the names appeared :
The Very Rev. T. Mathew,
The Very Rev. W. Delany,
Th e Very Rev. T. Barry, Vicar Capitular.
June 7. The Congregation of Cardinals select the Rev. W. Delany as Bishop
of Cork.
1850 Stained glass window finish ed and put up in new church in Charlotte Quay.
Cost £525. The window was the work of Gibbs, Hampstead Road, London.
It is a memorial to Daniel O Connell.
October 6. On this Sunday the South Friary was finally closed and the new
Church of the Most Holy Trinity was opened on October 10, the birthday of Rev.
Father Mathew. The consecrating bishop was the Right Rev. Dr. Delany,
assisted by the Right Rev. Dr. Murphy of Ross and Cloyne and the Right Rev.
Dr. Walsh of Ossory.
Up to May, 1854, the church cost £16,000. The heads carved in limes tone at
the main entrance to the new church and from which the arch springs were cut
by John Hogan. He was paid £10.
As the 3e last lines are written the deep-toned bell of the Father Mathew Memorial
Church rings out. The Capuchin tradition lives on.
NOTES
The following sources have been consulted :
1 Historia Missionis Hiberniae Fratrum Minorum
Capuccinurum by Father Robert O Connell.
The MS (written in Latin) is in the Bibliotheque
de Troyes, Cabinet des Mss., no. 706. There
is a copy in the Capuchin provincial archives.
2 Historie of the Irish Capuchins by Father Nicholas
Archbold. The MS (written in English) is in
the Bibliotheque de Troyes, Cabinet des MSS
no. 1103 There is a copy in the Capuchin
provincial archives.
3 Evangelicall Fritct of the Seraphicall Franciscan
Order by Father Nicholas Archbold. The MS.
was written (in English) in 1628 at the house
of Alderman Carbery, Bridge Street, Dublin.
It is now in the British Museum, Harl. MSS.,
no. 3888. There is a copy in the Capuchin
provincial archives.
Nicholas Archbold was a native of Mountain foot,
near Dalkey, Co. Dublin. His life may
be summarised thus: 1606- went to Flanders
to study; 1611- received into the Capuchins
at Cologne by Father Francis Nugent; after
profession he studied philosophy at Paderborn,
Germany; 1616- ordain ed; 1626- returned to
Ireland; 1642- exiled to France; 1643- completed
the Historie at Charleville; 1645-
returned to Ireland and worked in Wexford;
1650- died a martyr of charity while serving
the plague-stricken at Wexford.
4 Synopsis Annalium Capuccinorum Hyberniae by
Father Bonaventure Donnelly. The MS (written
in Latin) is in the Archives de Stato, Milan.
There is a copy in the Capuchin provincial
archives. References are given according to
the pagination of the copy which differs from
that of the MS.
Donnelly was a native of Oripontini or
Portarlington. He was received into the Capuchin
noviciate at Drogheda (south side) on
14 July, 1686. The Synopsis was completed
at Bar-sur-Aube in 1741. Father Donnelly
died at Bar-sur-Aube on 23 April, 1755, aged
94 years.
Other sources are indicated below.
 
