It is just three hundred years since the
Puritan troopers of General Edmund
Ludlow jumped from their horses before
the Franciscan Friary of Oir Bhealach,
which is now called Muckross Abbey, on
the wooded shore of Killarney's Loch
Lein.
They found the place wrapped in a
deathly stillness. The Gothic door of
the church was open, the door of the convent
swung ajar. A feather of smoke
from the kitchen chimney seemed to
promise that all was as usual within. But
no voice or footfall broke the silence, no
shadow stirred save the soundless smoke.
Warned in time, the community had fled.
Tramping through the friary, smashing
and despoiling, the raiders piled faggots
and bundles of straw, and soon smoke
was pouring from every window and the
flames leaped up and crackled and roared.
When at last the Roundheads rode away,
a good day's work had been done for
Cromwell, and a monument left to his
earthly fame.
Today Oir Bhealach is only a memory,
and Muckross Abbey a silent ruin in a
beautiful, tree-embowered, long-hallowed
spot, with peace and seclusion that seem
not of this age. A place where the past
comes to life in fancy, in visions conjured
up in the claustral quiet , in traditions such
as these, of twelve men whose stories are
part of the story of Muckross.
I A monk of Innisfallen
Seventh century
It was a bright spring morning, the old
story says, (and in the bright spring of
Ireland's new-found Faith) when those
monks of Innisfallen launched their
currach on Loch Lein.
From their monastery on the island
their brethren waved Godspeed. On the
northward height, eastern, was the old
monastic settlement of Aghadoe. But
ahead, to the south, no cross had yet been
raised, nor was there any hint of man's
presence, only the blue water, the green
of vast woods, the mountains wrapped
in their purple cloaks. Today that
southward scene is little changed, after
thirteen hundred years. Mountain, wood
and lake are wild and lovely as God made
them ; there is scarcely a sign of the works
of man.
Here had come Fathlenn, son of the
King of Cashel, having left the court of
his father, Aodh Damhain. He had
founded the monastery which gave the
island his name. And here he would die
a saint of the Church, for the peace and
beauty of this fairy isle did not lessen the
discipline of himself and his monks, nor
temper their austerities, nor blind them
to the spiritual wants of those outside
their convent.
The currach rounded the point of Ross
and entered the east ern arm of the lake,
where, on the farthest shore, curls of
smoke appeared above the treetops.
Where the limestone cliffs of Muckross
ended, the monks beached their craft in a
sheltered cove, and, landing, walked inland
through thinning trees. Here they
found tilled land and cattle, fires, dwellings,
people.
The people were friendly, and they soon
chose a site, a rocky eminence among the
groves, a place lovely and peaceful as
Innisfallen itself. " On this rock, le
congnamh De," they said, " we shall
build our church ," mindful of their Master and the Rock on which He had built.
" What name is on the place ? "
No name, the people said, but from all
the leafy groves about them, the songbirds
trilled as if in answer, in swelling
strains of such sweet, clear harmony as
none of them ever had heard before .
" Carraig an Cheoil ! " a monk cried out.
" Rock of the Music-let that be its
name."
And so it was named, and is named to
this day. They built their cill there,
tradition says, on the spot where the
sacristy of Muckross Abbey stands, and
centuries later it was burned and not rebuilt.
But only tradition is left to tell
this, for no written record of it can be
traced now.
2 Donal MacCarthach Mor
1440
MacCarthy Mór was weary of hunting.
The lure of the chase could not hold him
today. Dismissing the gillies, and bidding
his bodyguard wait apart, he sat in
the shelter of a heather-crowned rock,
the noonday sun warm on his face, the
great head of his wolfhound quiet against
his knee.
Far below on his right hand, the Atlantic
boomed by the cliffs of Derrynane.
Away to the south, across the wide bay,
the sun was gold on the peaks of Béara.
And eastward rose the Iveragh hills and
the piled-up masses of the mighty Reeks.
A quarter of Desmond lay there beneath
his gaze, and he the Lord of Desmond.
The grand, wild beauty of it gripped him
once more, the wine-like magic of sunlight
and sea, the shrill war-song of the
mountain wind. His hand tightened on
the hilt of his sword, the old fires blazed
in his eyes, the wolfhound quivered and
lifted its head.
But the hound's master sank back
again. MacCarthach Mór had grown
old at last. Old, battle-weary and uneasy
of conscience. He thought of his
lifetime of war and intrigue, of fights and
forays, of the blood that had reddened
the blade of his sword, and all the swords
and spears of Clann Charthaigh. What
would it all avail him when he went before
his God ?
What he had been considering, he now
would do. He would build a church for
the friars of St. Francis, those gentle
friars whom the people loved, whom
Norman barons and Irish chiefs had all
alike admired and welcomed. Each day
from that altar, Masses and prayers
would ascend to Heaven for the souls
that needed them, for the soul of Domhnall,
the MacCarthach Mór, when his own
time came. A feeling of peace stole over
the chieftain, his head nodded, his eyes
closed.
He started up, shouting, and his escort
came in haste. They found their
leader strangely excited. In his sleep,
he told them, he had had a vision. He
had heard enchanting music, and also
voices. Voices which told him to build
his church eastward, at Carraig an Cheoil.
" But where," he asked them, " is Carraig
an Cheoil ? "
None knew, and couriers were dispatched
to the east to look for it. A
Gaelic manuscript history of Kerry,
written in a mountain hut about 1754 by
Brother Donal O'Sullivan of the dispersed
friars of Muckross Abbey, relates
this story and gives legendary accounts
of the finding of Carraig an Cheoil. This
is quoted in O'Donovan's translation of
the Annals of The Four Masters, which
also records (under the date 1340, now
known to be wrong- it should be either
1440 or 1448) the following :
" The monastery of Oirbhealach at
Carraig an Cheoil, at the eastern end of
Loch Lein, in the diocese of Ardfert, in
Munster, was founded for Franciscan
friars by Mac Carthy More, Prince of
Desmond (Donnel, the son of Teigue) ;
and the chiefs of the country selected
burial places for themselves in this monastery.
Among these were O'Sullivan
More and the two O'Donohoes ."
(Oir Bhealach means the eastern pass,
namely, an ancient travel-route on the
east shore of the Killarney Lakes . The
name was corrupted to Irrelagh , which is
the designation given to Muckross Abbey
in many old documents.)
3 Father Richard
1468
Father Richard, first superior of the
new Franciscan monastery of Oir Bhealach,
sat at his desk in the scriptorium,
reading a document which had just
arrived from Rome. It was a Pontifical
Brief of Pope Paul the Second, granting
certain indulgences to all who should
annually visit this church and contribute
to " its finishing, enlargement, preservation,
and support." A translation of the
Latin preamble tells us that :
" Whereas ... the noble Donal Macchary,
Prince of Desmond . . . began to build
and construct ... for the use and habitation
of the Friars Minor, a house under
the invocation of the Blessed Trinity ...
with church, tower, bell, cemetery, dormitory,
refectory, gardens, orchards and
other necessary offices, situated upon
Lochleyn in the westernmost parts of the
world and in the diocese of Ardfert . . .
the site thereof, which was his lawful
property and of secular ownership, with
no city within almost forty miles . .. and
whereas since then our beloved son
Richard Chilvart and other friars of the
said order have lived in the said place for
twenty years, in strict penance and under
the regular observance ... and whereas
the house and church are not finished,
and the wealth of the said prince, by
reason of the strife and incessant wars
with which he is vexed by his enemies, is
not sufficient for the finishing of the work,
and the offerings of the faithful are to
hand in abundance : We, therefore . ..
Given in the year of our Lord's Incarnation,
1468, on April the twenty-third."
From this preamble, Father Richard
read on (still in Latin) to the detailing
of the indulgences, and came to the end
of the document with satisfaction and
relief. Poor Donal MacCarthy, he reflected
; sickness had been added to the
vexations caused by his enemies, and that
very same year of 1468 saw him laid in
his tomb in this monastery which he had
founded, and which through these mischances
was still unfinished. But the
offerings of the faithful would in time
complete the building, and with God's
holy help, the friars' work would go on.
And so it did, prayer and offices, labour
in field and cloister, writing and study
of missals and manuscripts, spiritual
ministration to the people and to wayfarers
on the pass that ran east of Loch
Lein.
4 Father Donatus
1589
As late as this year the friars were still
at Oir Bhealach, though it had been formally
suppressed in 1542. The writ of
Henry VIII did not run well in Munster,
but Elizabeth's minions showed more
ruthlessness and zeal. When her troops
reached the district the community fled,
but Father Donatus and a companion
remained behind to conceal the chalices
and other church valuables on what is
now known as Friars' Island in the
nearby lake.
What happened is told in a Latin passage in Brevis Synopsis Provinciae Hiberniae
F. F. Minorum, a translation of
which reads :
" Father Donatus O'Muirlihy and the
sacristan of the convent of Irrelagh, upon
report of the fury of the English against
other convents, hid part of the belongings
of the sacristy in a certain island of the
place called Lochlean, and returned to
get the rest. Finding the monastery in
the possesion of the soldiers, they returned
to the boat, but they were stoned
and overpowered. While they were in
their ag ony they were r evive d a little,
but as they refused to disclose where the
valuables were hidden, especially the
chalices, after having been urged thereto
by torture, they died the same night,
1589 ."
5 Finghin MacCarthach Reagh
1596
Finghin, or Florence as his name is
generally given in English, was son of the
Tanist of Muscraighe and head of the second
branch of Clann Charthaigh. He was
handsome, debonair and diplomatic.
Carew, Elizabeth's Deputy in Munster,
has noted that he was also " like Saul,
taller by the head and shoulder than any
of the forty followers who attended him."
Small wonder, perhaps, that he won the
heart of his cousin Eileen, who was
daughter to MacCarthy Mor, Earl of
Clancar. But there were obstacles in the
path of their romance.
He was already betrothed to another,
she was wooed insistently by a henchman
of the queen. Clancar was dead, his
son had predeceased him, and the hand
of his only daughter would be a passport
to his lands. Hence Elizabeth herself
frowned on their courtship. It jeopardized the political match which had her
royal approval, and threatened to unite
the two greatest branches of the MacCarthy
clan under the leadership of
Florence, a double treason in the eye of
the court. They were warned that persistence would lead to the Tower of London,
and this was a prophecy which eventually came true. The broken betrothal
was also to be considered, as well as other
enmities and intrigues of the Munster of
that day. They talked these problems
over and decided to elope.
On a moonlit night their party left
Pallas, Maccarthy Mór's castle at the
northern end of Loch Lein. A large boat
awaited them at the shore. The oarsmen
were light-armed kern, while a
dozen stalwart, heavy-armed gallowglasses
, their battle-axes gleaming in the
moonlight, formed not alone a guard of
honour, but one of prudence at such a
time.
Their boat passed the ancient abbey of
Innisfallen, expropriated now and falling
into ruin, like Aghadoe on the hill and
Oir Bhealach in the far-off woods. As
the monks in their currach, nine hundred
years before, they turned the point of
Ross and entered the eastern bay, now
sentinelled by MacCarthach Mór's
" castle of the loch ." Not towards the
castle was the boat steered, however, but
straight for Oir Bhealach on the other side
of the lake.
The bridal party entered the ruined
abbey, and made their way to the desolate
choir. By the tombs of the chieftains
they paused a space in prayer, and Eileen
sobbed quietly, for here her father had
but lately been laid to rest.
The altar still stood, though defaced
and broken, under the great window in
the eastern wall. A venerable friar took
his place before it, where he and his brethren had once prayed in peace. Tapers
were lighted and the ceremony began.
Few and little elated were the witnesses
of this wedding, that in happier times and
in the light of day, would bring princes
and chiefs from the four shores of Ireland.
Quietly, in the background, stood the
soldier s of the guard. No harp sounded,
no bard sang, no clansmen raised a joyous
cheer. There was only the moon and
the sickly tapers, and three voices murmuring
in the long-hushed choir.
6 Father Thaddeus
1626
Irrelagh, repurchased from an Elizabethan adventurer, was again in the hands
of the friars, who had never left the
neighbourhood although driven from
their home. Though for years untenanted,
and partly in ruins, it was much
frequented for prayer by the Catholics
of the district, its remote situation offering
some hope of peace.
A State Paper, dated l613, complained
that Catholic s had re-edified monasteries,
"wherein friars publicly preach and say
Mass," one of those specified being
" Irrelagh in Desmond." In l616, Father
Thaddeus, the guardian, began both
collecting of alms and the start of work on
restoring the building. For ten years he
laboured, gathering alms through the
countryside, directing the masons whose
work can still be seen, gradually reviving
the monastery and its mission. The
restoration was completed in 1626, as a
commemorative tablet in the choir proclaims,
in old Latin letters, now faint and
hard to read.
Alas for the toiling and the hopes of
Father Thaddeus. His good work drew
the wrath of the powers in authority and
very shortly afterwards the friars had
to fly again. Once more their home became a prey to the elements, and the
provincial chapter at Limerick, in August
1629, could make no appointment
whatever to the friary of Irrelagh, deeming
unsafe even the " local refuge " of
the friars who had remained nearby.
Another decade passed, and a small
community returned to their house. But
the final blow was not long delayed.
The siege of Ross Castle in 1652 brought
Ludlow and his Cromwellians to the shores
of Loch Lein. A great fire blazed up
from Carraig an Cheoil ; the smoke-pall,
drifting above the woods where they
sheltered , told the fleeing brethren the
fate of their convent. Missal and manuscript,
panel and beam, became ash in that holocaust; only the stone shell of
Irrelagh remained, and the Faith that
shall outlive stone.
7 Pierce Ferriter
1653
On the wild Kerry shore near Ballyferriter in Corea Dhuibhne, a crumbling
old castle stands by the cliffs. Dunquin
and the Blaskets lie beyond the seaward
headland ; the western ocean spray flies
high in solid sheets, and Mount Brandon
stands nearby, the clouds about its head.
And all around are the clustered Gaeltacht villages, where the lovely Gaelic
speech lives on, undefiled, and with it
the kindly, prince-like courtesies of an
old race.
Here dwelt, in this once fine castle,
Piaras Feiriteir, scion of Normans who
became more Irish than the Irish, chieftain
and aristocrat, poet and scholar.
But an aristocrat who felt deeply for
the common people, and a poet who
could fight valiantly against the black
Cromwellian tyranny which was overwhelming
them all. First as deputy
leader, then as leader, of the Irish in
Kerry, he kept the war going until 1653.
The last of the leaders to lay down arms,
when further resistance was hopeless, he
accepted a parley-on-safe-conduct offer
from Brigadier Nelson at Ross Castle,
who violated the terms and condemned
him to death.
Evening on Muckross Lake
His name is on the four poets' memorial
tablet in the nave of Muckross Abbey,
with O'Rahilly, O'Donoghue and O'Sullivan.
These latter are buried there,
Piaras is not, but they are grouped
together as the four poets of Kerry, and
besides, he has another historic connection
here.
With Piaras to the scaffold, in 1653,
went two other noble souls, the son of
O'Connor-Kerry, and Father Thaddeus
Moriarty O.P., of Tralee. They were
hanged at Killarney on Cnoc na gCaorach,
the Hill of the Sheep, which since that
year has been known as Cnoc na Martra,
Martyrs' Hill. On its crest stands the
modern Franciscan friary of Killarney,
worthy successor to Oir Bhealach.
8 Geoffrey O'Donoghue
1677
Seafraidh O Donnchadha a' Ghleanna,
like Ferriter, was a chieftain as well as
one of the four Kerry poets. His castle
of Killaha, ruined and ivy-draped, you
may see in a grove where the road from
Killarney turns into Glenflesk on its way
over the mountains to Ballyvourney and
Cork. Here he gave his famous banquets,
for Geoffrey was not only a poet in his
own right, but patron of all the poets of
Munster, and he loved to entertain them
in lavish style, and with them the scholars
and musicians of his clan.
His bitterest poem scarifies the treachery
of Charles II, who, after all that the
Irish had hoped for from the Stuart
Restoration refused to alter, and did
indeed confirm, the brutal robberies of the
Cromwellians. Like most of his class,
Geoffrey lost everything, and saw the
beginning of the end of the Gaelic social
system in the tumult and upheaval of
that terrible time. But he never lost his
spirit, and to the end kept making poems
about the great days that were gone.
He lies at rest in the choir of Muckross
Abbey, with the poets of Kerry and the
chieftains of the glens.
9 Aodhagan O'Rahilly
1728
Foremost by far of the four Kerry
poets; greatest, many critics hold, of all
the poets of the Gael: thus we may
speak of Aodhagán O Rathaille, of whom,
as a man, we know so little but whose
poems stand witness to his genius and
learning, and envision for us as well his
rare and noble spirit.
From his mother came his Christian
name, and possibly too, his genius, for
the MacEgans were noted as a scholarly
clan. Born in the Sliabh Luachra country ,
some miles east of Killarney, he received
a classical education in one of the period's
celebrated Kerry schools. Guided by
Gaelic scholars in the traditional bardic
lore he studied intensively the literary
arts, poetry, history, the genealogy of
the chiefs and clans. Thus he trained
and disciplined his singing soul, and the
fruit of that study is in the scholarship
of his poetry and his mastery of the
language of the Gael. He attained an
equal command of the popular metres,
which moved alike the scholar and the
plain man, as the stilted classic verse
which he abandoned could not do.
He had meant, it would seem to be a
genealogist and historian, and poet to the
chieftain, in the traditional bardic way.
This rank, he tells us, his ancestors had
held for more centuries than he knew,
when he describes the MacCarthys as :
" The princes my fathers served ere
Christ did die." But the day of the
princes was gone forever, and with it the
day of the bards. Aodhagan toiled for
his family on some unknown small holding
and sustain ed his spirit by the fire of his
poems.
Three times in that century of the poet's
birth, war, rapine and terror had stormed
through the land. Its early years saw
the famine-ridden backwash of Elizabeth's
campaign ; midway, the Curse of
Cromwell ; and near its end, the Williamite
war, which Aodhagan lived
through as a boy. In these three hurricanes
of slaughter and desolation the
immemorial Gaelic clan system came
painfully to its end. The Planters entrenched
themselves in the rich lands of
the chieftains, the decimated Irish were
banished to the hills, the abbeys fell in
ruins ; the old life was dying hard, but
dying, never to be revived.
He made elegies and ceremonial poems
for such patrons as were left to him, but
these tragedies and changes were mainly
Aodhagan's theme. He painted vivid
nostalgic word-pictures of the vanishing
Gaelic order, or passionate discourses on
the spoiled and plundered land. Or he
fiercely exhorted his outlawed countrymen
to fight back at the usurpers and regain
their own. Then he would turn to
dreams and fancies, and in such mood he
gave us his wondrous aisling or vision - poem,
the exquisite Gile na Gile, the
Brightness of Brightness, which is his
native land personified as a vision - maiden
to whom he sings in verses of
most delicate imagery and sweetest lilt.
Though despoiled himself of his land
and possessions, his brave and noble
spirit was undaunted to the end. In his
daughter's house at Derrycunnihy, by
Killarney's Upper Lake, he made his last
proud, defiant poem on his dying bed :
For help I will not call, till I'm laid in the
narrow coffin
I will follow after the heroes I loved to the
grave...
Those princes my fathers served ere Christ
did die.
In the nave of Muckross Abbey, a
flat-lying, broken limestone slab covers
the mortal remains of Aodhagán
O Rathaille.
10 O Suilleabhain Mor
1762
O'Sullivan Mór was dying. From his
castle window on Tomies Mountain, he
could look out on the evening beauty of
Loch Lein. By rising a little on his couch,
he could see across to the eastern shore,
where the woods climbed from Muc Ros
to Mangerton's slopes.
He thought of his life, so near its ending,
and of his proud title, which was ending
too, for after his passing none claimed
the title of O'Sullivan Mór. But, moladh
le Dia, his name would go on, and go on
in honour if not in wealth. For honour
was all he had left, honour and faith
and his ancient lineage.
How often had they disputed, the
O'Sullivan's and MacCarthys, as to which
clan was the more ancient in the Milesian
line. From remote pagan times his mind
followed their history- from Cashel of the
Kings and the plains of Ur Mhumhain - through
the struggle with the steel-armoured
Norman and Saxon - the stubborn
retreat to the fastnesses of Deas
Mhumhain, where their Eoghanacht subchiefs,
the O'Donoghues and Moriartys,
had preceded them seven hundred years
before. The story of ages- told in seconds.
What were those vanished ages to the
eternity before him !
He thought of Loch Lein's Eugenian
chieftains, and other chiefs of the Desmond
clans ; of him who was destined
to be the last Maccarthy Mór ; of
O'Sullivan Bere, his allegiance now to
Spain ; of O'Connor-Kerry, avowing his
faith on the very scaffold ; of the Earl
of Desmond, murdered in the glen ; of
O'Donoghue still living, landless but
Faithful.
And now O'Sullivan Mór, the last of
his title, lay dying in poverty in his
half-ruined home ; dying in poverty ,
but easy in conscience for he was at
peace with his God. He lifted his head
and looked out across the water to the
Muc Ros woods on the eastern shore
whither they would bear him to his
tomb in the abbey.
His soul exalted, his face serene, he
lay back easily and began to pray .
11 Eoghan Ruadh
1784
Last of our four poets in point of time,
but one of the first in Ireland in the sway
of his songs, was wild, reckless, lovable
Owen Roe O'Sullivan, Red Owen, also
sometimes known as Eoghan a' Bheoil
Bhinn, Owen of the Sweet Mouth. Like
Egan O'Rahilly, he came from Sliabh
Luachra and was classically schooled,
but a greater contrast could hardly be
found between two men.
Scapegrace scion of a princely clan,
Eoghan Ruadh had such gifts of scholarship
that at eighteen years of age he
opened his own school. But the pedagogue
alas, grew over fond of the gay
company of the taverns; his school
failed and he was forced to seek fresh
fields. Working as a labourer he wandered
from place to place, renowned for
his learning, welcomed for the buoyant,
melodious, racy poems which have made
him " the Burns of the Gael," beloved
by the people for his fellow-feeling with
the poorest, his laughing, devil-may-care
spirit and his apt and merry wit.
Working near Fermoy for a well-to-do
man named Nangle, he wrote his employer
a letter on behalf of some poor
woman who wanted a favour. The letter,
perfectly worded in four languages, got
him a post as tutor to Nangle's family
but again the ale-shops interfered with
his tutoring and the next we hear of him
is in the British navy. He served in
Rodney's ship at the battle of Dominica
in 1782, and celebrated that French
defeat with a poem, Rodney's Glory,
which is reputed to have greatly pleased
the admiral.
Back in Kerry, his health impaired
and unsuccessful with another school,
poor Owen gave himself up to his old
roistering ways, and in a new poem
announced his philosophy :
Prodigally shall I call for ale and spirits
And I shall not keep one halfpenny of my
pay.
In 1784, a sick man by then, he died
from a blow in a tavern brawl. On an
evening of storm and lashing rain, his
funeral halted at Ath na gCorp, the
Ford of the Corpses, on the river Flesk,
unable to cross the flood-swollen torrent.
As night came on, thunder crashed and
lightning blazed in the blackening sky.
The coffin was placed in shelter for the
night.
Late next afternoon, the storm gone
and the flood subsided, they forded the
river with the body of Eoghan Ruadh.
All along the route, waiting groups
joined those who followed the coffin till
they came to Oir Bhealach, which was
now called Muckross, to the ruined
abbey where as evening fell his grave
was closed .
They buried him with his people of
the race of Red Marcus, beside the
tomb of O'Sullivan Mór. The country
folk who mourned him thronged the
roofless choir, and though many a priest
had scolded him for his wild ways, it is
a tradition that the clergy of half the
countryside were there that day.
12 Father James Fitzgerald
1880
Two hundred years had not wiped the
smoke-stain of Cromwell's fire from the
walls of Oir Bhealach, nor driven the sons
of St. Francis from the shores of Loch
Lein, for through all the woe of the Penal
Days they were always to be found nearby.
About 1750, they had a rough habitation
in the Friars' Glen, a bleak and
desolate place between the mountains of
Tore and Mangerton, and here Brother
Donal O'Sullivan wrote his " Ancient
History of the Kingdom of Kerry."
A quarter of a century later, the Penal
Laws having been slightly relaxed, the
friars moved down to a small stone
"friary" on the banks of the river
Flesk, where the superior, Father Anthony
Daly, also designated a Guardian
of Muckross, to which the friars still
claimed title, though it had long been
in ruins. In 1780, under the leadership
of John Keogh, forerunner of the Liberator,
Catholics were reorganizing in
profession of their faith, and the friars
moved into Killarney town where for
many years they carried on the only
college for Catholics which then existed
in the diocese of Kerry.
In the 1840 decade the college was
burned down, but another was opened
near the cathedral gates. In this new
Franciscan college the exiled friars of
Muckross taught Greek, Latin, French,
English, Italian, Geography, History, etc.
The superior was vigorous, scholarly,
amiable Father James Fitzgerald, who
was a native of Dingle. He was the last,
officially, of the Muckross friars but by
no means the last of the friars of Loch
Lein.
In the middle years of the nineteenth
century, it was a custom of the country
people from all over Kerry to come once
a year to Muckross for the Feast of
the Portiuncula. A special contingent
always came from West Kerry, and
these, his own people, Father James was
especially glad to see, though, for all the
pilgrims, strangers or friends, his great
heart had a full welcome. Year after
year he was there to greet them, and
join those devout country people as,
barefoot and frequently fasting, they
recited the prescribed prayers.
Father James was the living link
between the old Muckross and the new
Muckross which is the fine modern friary
of Killarney and which he lived to see
completed and dedicated before his death
in the friary in Clonmel.
Epilogue
There are no ghost stories about
Muckross Abbey. The white ladies and
headless horsemen, and the other classic
figures of spookdom, have never been
familiars of this holy place .
When the sun goes down and the
birds are quiet in the great beech trees,
you may see visions in the fading light :
MacCarthy Mór riding by with his retinue
; travellers, at nightfall, being welcomed
at the door of the abbey ;
O'Rahilly's " narrow coffin " being
lowered into the tomb ; a disguised friar
of the Penal Days, praying in the ruins
before resuming his weary way ; Father
Donatus and his companion in the grip
of the soldiery ; Father Thaddeus directing
masons to rebuild; Father James
on the Feast of Portiuncula, leading the
people in prayer. Thus come the visions
from the long-dead past, of chieftains
and their ladies, of poets and warriors
and saintly friars, whose lives are part
of the story of Muckross.
