John, by the Grace of God and the Favour of the Apostolic See, Cardinal Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of All Ireland, to the Clergy and Faithful of the Diocese of Armagh.
Very Reverend and Reverend Fathers,
and dearly beloved brethren in Christ,
on 8 December, 1854, in the presence
of about five hundred bishops and
many princes of the Church, His
Holiness Pope Pius IX, proclaimed as a
truth revealed by God and as a dogma
of our Catholic Faith the doctrine " that
the Most Blessed Virgin Mary, by a
singular grace and privilege of Almighty
God, in virtue of the merits of Jesus
Christ, the Saviour of mankind, was at
the first moment of her conception
preserved free from all taint of original
sin." On 8 September, 1953, Pope Pius
XII, now happily reigning, in an Encyclical
entitled Fulgens Corona issued an
appeal to the faithful of the Catholic
world to prepare for the worthy celebration
of the centenary of that dogma
by a Marian Year of special devotion to
our Blessed Lady.
I am confident that nowhere will the
Holy Father's appeal meet with a more
spontaneous and more generous response
than in our own country which, almost
from the moment it received the priceless
heritage of the Faith, has been noted for
its reverence and love of the Blessed
Mother of God. That is a lesson it must
have learned from the lips of our National
Apostle. A year before he was commanded
to undertake his mission to Ireland,
was held the celebrated Council of
Ephesus, which vindicated Mary's claim
to the title ' Mother of God,' and condemned the heresy of Nestorius, who
maintained that she should be acknowledged
only as the mother of the man,
Christ. The decision of the Council,
which defended Mary's unique dignity,
was greeted by an extraordinary outburst
of popular enthusiasm. Such memories
were fresh in the mind of St Patrick,
when he came amongst us to begin the
labours of his apostolate.
The people of Ireland, in their desire
to pay St. Brigid the highest compliment
in their power, styled her ' the Mary of
the Gael. ' One of the earliest and most
distinguished of our poets, Sedulius,
hymned the praises of our Blessed Lady
in words that are still used in the Introit
of her Mass. The most wonderful tribute
ever paid to her is found in an old Irish
Litany composed in her honour, which
almost exhausts the language of eulogy,
while being rich in doctrinal significance.
In it she is addressed as the ' Royal
Throne of the Eternal King, resplendent
like the sun, replete with the grace of the
Holy Spirit, the cancelling of Eve's
disgrace.' Another of our poets alludes
in striking language to her eagerness to
help the dying. " There is no hound
in fleetness or in chase, north wind or
rapid river, as speedy as the Mother
of Christ to the bed of death." Our
bardic poets used all the resources of
their native tongue to sing the glories of
Mary, and extol her virtues and prerogatives.
For them she is " the Lady
who guards the world, the Guiding Star
of every wanderer, the Protectress of the
weak," on whose saving help they count
especially when they have to appear
before the Judgment Seat of her Divine
Son.
In this year when we are called on to
honour one of Mary's greatest privileges,
we can feel proud of the fact that the
Feast of her Conception was celebrated
in Ireland as early as the eighth century,
if not earlier. The Feast clearly points to
the belief that there was something
extraordinary about her Conception.
Many of the Irish Franciscans, including
a former Archbishop of Armagh, Hugh
MacCaughwell, were intrepid champions
of Mary's Immaculate Conception. It is
significant of Irish devotion to Our Lady
that, when the General Assembly of the
Catholic Confederation met at Lough rea
on 7 December, 1650, it decreed by a
unanimous vote that the Virgin Mother
of God under the title of the Immaculate
Conception should be solemnly proclaimed
Patroness of the Kingdom of Ireland. In
times of crisis our countrymen readily
turned for help to Muire Máthair, as they
loved to style her. We can recall how
Owen Roe O'Neill gave to his soldiers as
their watchword at Benburb Sancta
Maria, and how Father Boetius MacEgan
intoned the Litany of Loreto, as they
took their places in the ranks before the
battle. While many of our Blessed Lady's
shrines were destroyed by the fanatical
zeal of the Reformers, she always remained
securely enthroned in the hearts
of her devoted Irish children. During the
darkness of the Penal Days, when the
Mass was proscribed, fidelity to the
Rosary, the Coróin Mhuire, kept the
light of Faith burning in many an Irish
homestead. In it, too, they found their
greatest consolation during the tragic
years of the Famine, which took such a
terrible toll of our people. A regular
feature of the domestic scene throughout
Ireland was " Rosary Time," when
the family gathered to pray to our
Blessed Lady that her Divine Son might
send a blessing on the home. In this
connection it is interesting to read the
report which Cromwell made to the
English Parliament after his ruthless
campaign against our country. " All is
not well with Ireland yet. You gave me
the money, you gave me the guns. But
let me tell you that every house in
Ireland is a house of prayer, and when
I bring these fanatical Irish before the
muzzles of my guns, they hold up in their
hands a string of beads, and they never
surrender." We in this generation have
thus a great tradition to maintain of
loyalty to Mary, and of confidence in the
power of her intercession and her readiness
to help us in all our needs. We
can rejoice that in our day Ireland has
given to Our Lady her greatest gift in the
Legion of Mary, which carries on its
standard the image of the Immaculate
Virgin. Already established in every
continent, it has been called "the miracle
of the modern world," clearly bearing the
signature of God. It has been proclaimed
as the most effective instrument of the
lay apostolate for bringing back to
Christ those who have wandered far from
Him and from His teaching.
To understand Mary's unique privilege
in her Immaculate Conception, we must
view it against the background of the
Fall and of Original Sin. When God
created our First Parents, out of the
abundance of His love He endowed them
with special gifts to which as human
beings they had no title. His greatest
gift to them was that of sanctifying grace,
which raised them to a new plane of
existence wholly out of the reach of their
natural powers. Through it they were
made " partakers of the divine nature "
(II Peter, I.4). They became the adopted
children of God, heirs to His Kingdom,
in which as the full flowering of this
precious gift they would in the direct
vision of their Creator enjoy happiness
for all eternity (Rom. VIII. 15-17 ;
I Cor. XIII. 12; I John, III. 1-2). In
addition they possessed the gift of integrity, by which a perfect harmony
was established at the various levels of
man's being, so that his lower nature
was subject to his higher, and his passions
were under the control of reason. They
also were to enjoy the privilege of immortality
on condition that they remained
obedient to God's command not
to eat the fruit of the tree which brings
the knowledge of good and evil. " For
in whatsoever day thou shalt eat of it,
thou shalt die the death " (Gen. II. 17).
Our First Parents were thus not to suffer
death as we know it, but were to pass
without dying into eternal life. They
were, moreover, placed in a garden of
delight in which they lived in a state of
innocence, free from disease and pain
and sorrow. In God's design they were,
if they remained faithful to Him, to
transmit all these gifts to their descendants.
We are familiar with the story of the
Fall, as it is related in the Book of
Genesis. Satan, envious of man's privileged
position (Wisd. II. 23-24) entered
the garden of paradise in the form of
a serpent, determined to rob him of his
supernatural dignity, and establish his
dominion over him. God's command was
given to enable man, so generously endowed,
to make some offering in return
as an acknowledgment of his indebtedness
to his Creator, and as a sign of his
willing obedience and entire submission.
Satan began by playing subtly on Eve's
pride. He questioned God's authority to
restrict the liberty of our First Parents
in forbidding them to eat of the fruit of
the tree of knowledge. God, he said,
knows that, as soon as you eat of this
fruit , " your eyes will be opened, and
you will be like gods, knowing good and
evil" (Gen. III. 5). So the woman did
eat of the fruit, and then induced her
husband to follow her example. As the
result of their disobedience Adam and
Eve were deprived of the priceless gift
of sanctifying grace, and were degraded
from their supernatural state. They
forfeited with their other privileges the
friendship of God, and were driven from
the garden of paradise condemned to
pain and labour and death.
" As by one man sin entered the world
and by sin death ; and so death passed
upon all men in that all have sinned "
(Rom. V. 12). The dread consequences
of Adam's sin fell upon all his descendants.
Through his disobedience God's plan for
mankind was wrecked, and human nature
became tainted at its source. Adam
sinned not merely as an individual, but
as the head and representative of the
human family. With one glorious exception
we are all involved in his guilt
(I Cor. XV. 21-22). We come into the
world in a state of original sin, deprived
of sanctifying grace and the other special
gifts which in God's design we were to
enjoy if Adam had not rebelled against
His command. Bound by a natural link
to our sinful head we are born " children
of wrath," estranged from God, instead
of children enjoying His friendship, and
destined for eternal life (Eph. II. 3) .
Pain, disease, and death will be our
portion. The harmony between the various
elements of our being is destroyed,
so that we experience a constant struggle
between our higher nature and our lower,
between what St. Paul describes as the
law of the mind and the law of the
members (Rom. VII. 15-23). " For the
imagination and thought of man's heart
are prone to evil from his youth " (Gen.
VIII. 21). Another effect of original sin
is to place us in bondage to sin and to
Satan (cf. Rom. VI. 16). The " prince
of this world" regained his natural
empire, which was diminished when man
was raised to the supernatural plane
(cf. John, XII. 31; XIV. 30; II Cor.
IV. 4). Since the Fall every child of
Adam, owing to the loss of sanctifying
grace, comes into the world enrolled
under Satan's banner and subject to
his way (Acts, XXVI. 18 ).
As the result of the sin of our First
Parents there was darkness over the
earth. God, however, dealt more mercifully with fallen man than He did with
the rebel angels, who were cast into hell
for all eternity (Luke, X. 18 ; Apoc. XII.
7 et seq.). Straightaway after Satan had
successfully tempted Adam and Eve to
revolt against the divine command, God
promised that He would send a Redeemer Whose task it would be to
reconcile man with his Creator, restore
him to his lost heritage, and set him
once more on the path that leads to
eternal life. Speaking of the fulfilment
of this promise St. Paul says: "When
the fullness of time was come God sent
His Son born of a woman, born under
the Law, to redeem them who were
under the Law, that we might receive
the adoption of sons " (Gal. IV. 4-5 ;
cf. Gen. XLIX. 10). From the moment
of the Fall God foreshadowed an eternal
conflict in which the Woman and her
Child would vanquish Satan and his
seed. St. John in his Apocalypse (Ch.
XII.) describes for us in vivid language
a vision which he had of the attempt
of the great red dragon to destroy the
Woman and her Child, "Who was to rule
all nations." While her Son was taken
up to God and to His throne, the Woman
was saved by God's protection. Then in
a fierce battle Michael and his angels
conquered the dragon and his angels, and
cast them out of Heaven. The dragon
is also referred to as " that old serpent
who is called the devil or Satan, who
seduceth the whole world. " "Now," a
voice from Heaven proclaims, " is come
salvation and strength and the kingdom
of our God and the power of his Christ."
The opponents of Satan, we are told,
overcame him by the blood of the Lamb.
The devil, having failed in his attack, is
angry with the Woman, and wants to
make war on the rest of her seed, who
keep the commandments of God and
hold fast to the truth concerning Jesus
Christ. The vision of St. John is in part
commonly interpreted as referring to the
period before the Fall, when God revealed
to the angels the mystery of
the Incarnation, and made known to
them the divine decree according to
which His Son would assume a created
nature taken not from among themselves, but from among creatures far inferior to them in dignity. They would
be expected to render homage not only
to the God-man, but to His Mother,
the Woman who is described as " clothed
with the sun, and the moon beneath her
feet, and on her head a crown of twelve
stars." Satan and his followers refused
obedience to this decree, and raised the
standard of revolt against God. Expelled
from Heaven, in their wounded pride and
their envy and hatred of the human
race, they were determined to wage war
upon the earth, seeking to destroy the
Son of God in His human nature, assailing the Woman who was privileged to be
His Mother, and attacking with especial
malice all who bear witness to Jesus
Christ. St. John's vision thus moves
between the period of Satan's rebellion
and the time of the Incarnation and
Redemption, when he is overcome through
the blood of the Lamb.
In the light of St. John's vision we are
in a better position to understand the
striking words which God addressed to
the serpent immediately after the Fall.
" Because thou hast done this thing,
thou art cursed among the beasts of the
earth. I will place enmities between thee
and the woman, between thy seed and
her seed ; she shall crush thy head and
thou shalt lie in wait for her heel "
(Gen . III. 14-15). God in these words
foretold the unceasing conflict between
the Woman and her seed and Satan and
his seed. As the outcome of the struggle
she (or, according to some, her seed)
will crush the serpent's head. Thus, in
words used by Pius IX in the Bull
defining the Immaculate Conception, "was
clearly shown forth the merciful Redeemer
of the human race, Jesus Christ."
Christ came into the world that He might
destroy the works of the devil, and
deliver His followers from his yoke
(I John, III. 8; Hebr. II. 14-15 ; Acts,
XXVI. 18; cf. Rom. XVI. 20). As our
Divine Lord announced to His Apostles,
" the prince of this world cometh, but
has no hold over Me " (John, XIV. 30;
XII. 31). Christ alone broke the power
of Satan, but closely associated with Him
in the struggle against the evil one was
the Woman described in Genesis and the
Apocalypse, whom the Church has identified
with His Blessed Mother. The
Mother will play her part, though it be
secondary, in her Son's victory over sin
and Satan, and in the redemption of
mankind.
From all eternity God had before His
mind the image of the Woman who was
predestined to be the Mother of the
Redeemer. With exquisite care she would
be prepared for the most sublime dignity
that could be conferred upon a creature.
She would be God's masterpiece, the
crown of His creation, the noblest manifestation
of His power. As she was to be
the Mother of the sinless Redeemer, the
sanctuary in which the Most High would
dwell, never would her soul be darkened
by the smallest shadow of sin. As she
was to share with her Son in the task of
crushing the serpent's head, never, even
from the first moment of her conception,
would she pass under the dominion of
Satan. She alone of the children of
Adam would have no part in his guilt.
As Pius IX declares, "it was altogether
fitting that as the Only-Begotten had in
Heaven a Father Whom the Seraphim
proclaim thrice holy, so He should have
on earth a Mother who would never be
wanting in the splendour of holiness."
In the words of Cardinal Newman,
" nothing is too high for her to whom
God owes His human life, no exuberance
of grace, no excess of glory."
When the fullness of time was come,
the perfect woman of God's choice
appeared in the person of a humble
maiden of Nazareth, called Mary. When
Gabriel came to announce to her that
she was to become the Mother of God,
though he came from the unveiled
splendour of his Creator and from the
glorious company of the blessed, as if
astonished by the radiant brightness of
Mary's soul, he addressed her in words
that contained the highest compliment
ever paid to a creature. " Hail, full of
grace, the Lord is with thee ; blessed art
thou amongst women." He found in her
a reflection of God's eternal holiness, a
soul endowed with every perfection,
clothed in a sanctity that in common
estimate outrivalled the highest of the
angels. The plenitude of grace bestowed
on Mary rendered her immune from even
the slightest moral imperfection. She
was untroubled by the revolt of the
senses, the evil inclinations, the interior strife, that afflict all others as the
result of Adam's sin. Here in the bosom
of fallen humanity we behold a creature
fresh and unstained, and so redeemed as
to be the promise and pledge of our
redemption. We might say in truth that
the birth of Mary saw the ending of the
long night of darkness that had fallen
on the world through the sin of our
First Parents.
Soon after the Annunciation, Mary set
out over the hill country on a journey
of compassion to her cousin, St. Elizabeth,
for the angel had announced that
Elizabeth, though now advanced in years,
had in the Providence of God conceived
a son. As Mary entered her house,
Elizabeth, filled with the Holy Ghost,
greeted her in words that were another
striking testimony to her unique holiness.
" Blessed art thou amongst women and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And
whence is this to me that the mother of
my Lord should come to me ? For behold
as soon as the voice of thy salutation
sounded in my ears, the infant in my
womb leaped for joy " (Luke, I 42-44).
Then Mary, in her turn inspired by the
Holy Spirit, broke out into the glowing
language of the Magnificat, the most
sublime of canticles. " My soul doth
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath
rejoiced in God my Saviour. For behold
from henceforth all generations shall call
me blessed, because He that is mighty
hath done great things to me, and holy
is His Name." With prophetic insight
and with unwavering confidence in God's
saving power, she made a claim that
comes strangely from the lips of an
obscure village maiden. Yet how wonderfully
has her prophecy been fulfilled down
through the ages. The Church has proclaimed
her blessed in her conception,
because through the redemptive merits of
her Son and Saviour she was preserved
free from the taint of original sin, and
thus was never even for an instant
subject to the power of Satan. She has
been proclaimed blessed in her life
because by her co-operation with God's
Grace every act of hers was a source of
increased merit, which rendered her soul
daily more beautiful. The Church has
also proclaimed her blessed in her death,
because through the power of her Divine
Son she was enabled to conquer death,
and enter body and soul into the glory
of Heaven without experiencing the corruption
of the grave. Pius IX could
thus declare that " she approaches as
near to God as a created nature can
and that she is far beyond the praises of
men and angels." We pay special homage
to Mary as the Mother of God, chosen
from amongst all women for the most
exalted dignity. Her Divine Maternity
is the source of all her other prerogatives.
It is at the same time the reason for our
veneration, the foundation of our trust
in her, and the chief motive for the love
that we bear her. But we honour Mary,
too for the vital part which she played
in our redemption. She was promised
with her Son for the deliverance of
mankind from the bondage of sin and
the dominion of Satan. Though her
role was a secondary and subordinate
one, it formed a vital link between
heaven and earth.
As the time approached when the
coming of the Messias, " the hope of the
nations," was expected, speculation must
have been rife among Jewish women as
to who would be chosen for the ineffable
privilege of giving birth to the Saviour
of the world. Mary had dedicated her
virginity to God, and so had renounced
the honour. When the angel came to her
with his mysterious message, she was
greatly troubled until Gabriel assured her
that she had found favour with God,
and that her Son would be conceived by
the power of the Holy Ghost. Thus she
could unite the dignity of motherhood
with the glory of virginity. Mary, ever
submissive to the Divine Will, no longer
hesitated. " Behold the handmaid of the
Lord, be it done unto me according to
thy word." By her consent, as St.
Ambrose says, she set in motion the
salvation of the world. She accepted the
angel's message on our behalf as well as
on her own, and consented to become
both the Mother of God and the Mother
of the Redeemer. For, as the angel said
to Joseph, " she shall bring forth a Son,
and thou shalt call His name Jesus.
Because He will save His people from
their sins" (Matt. I. 21). From Mary's
virginal body would come the flesh and
blood that were to be offered on Calvary
in atonement for the sins of mankind.
Early did she learn to tread the royal
road of suffering, to earn for herself the
title of Mother of Sorrows. Simeon's
prophecy made it clear that her Child
was a sign to be contradicted, and that
her maternal heart would be pierced by
a sword of sorrow (Luke, II. 34-35).
Thenceforth, we might say, the shadow of
Calvary lay across her path. Soon he
was to be a refugee mother, who with
Joseph carried her Son into exile in a
strange, unknown land, to save Him
from the evil designs of Herod. She,
who was the most highly favoured of
God's creatures, was also the most
afflicted. As the years went on, her
sorrow grew in intensity, but through it
all she made a complete offering to God
of her will and of her sufferings. During
the public life of our Divine Lord she
saw His goodness requited by the basest
ingratitude, and witnessed the unceasing
efforts of the Chief Priests and the
Pharisees to fan the flame of popular
hatred against Him. Her sorrow mounted
until it reached its climax on Calvary,
where every cry of anguish wrung from
the dying Saviour found an echo in her
mother's heart. She saw her Son then
as the Man of Sorrows, " wounded for
our iniquities, bruised for our sins "
(Is. LIII. 5). Through His long agony
she stood bravely by the Cross, uniting
her sufferings with those of Christ and
sharing as fully as a creature could in
His P assion. She, too, offered her sacrifice in surrendering her Son, her dearest
possesion, for the salvation of a fallen
world. Thus in accordance with the
terms of God's promise to send a Redeemer, Mother and Son were associated
in the victory over Satan. Though
Mary's part in our Redemption was subordinate and of limited value, drawing
its efficacy from the merits of her Divine
Son, Who alone could make the satisfaction for sin due to the infinite majesty
of God, yet her co-operation was necessary
and real so that many claim for
her the title of Co-Redemptrix.
St. Paul in particular has many illuminating things to say about the Fall and
the Redemption. Adam, through whom
as the head and representative of our
race, sin passed to all men, is the figure
of Him Who is to come, and Who will
be the author of blessing and of life, as
Adam was the source of sin and of death
(Rom. V. 12 et seq.). Christ, the second
Adam (cf. I Cor. XV. 45), will in His
turn act as the head and representative
of the human race, and win back justification and salvation for all mankind.
" As in Adam all die, so also in Christ
all shall be made alive " (I Cor. XV. 22 ;
Rom. V. 19). But the good wrought by
Christ in our favour more than counterbalanced the evil wrought by Adam. He
atoned not only for Adam's sin, but for
our personal sins as well. He merited
for us a super abundance of grace (Rom.
V. l5- 20). Christ in His own right is the
one Mediator between God and man, as
by His Passion and Death He made
atonement to God on our behalf and won
for us justification, meriting both pardon
of our sins and the restoration of sanctifying grace, with the right to Heaven hereafter (I Tim. II 5; Hebr. IX. 15). But
we only begin to participate in the
merits of the Redemption when, through
a new birth in Baptism, we are incorporated in Christ, and raised to the
supernatural life.
Though Christ is the one Mediator in
His own right, yet Mary is also a mediator
in a subordinate sense through the merits
of her Divine Son, with Whom she was closely united in the work of Redemption.
As a woman played apart in our fall, so
by the side of the Redeemer will be a
second woman co-operating in our restoration. As there is a second Adam, so
there is a second Eve. The role of Mary
is thus described by several of the early
Fathers. With the pride and disobedience
of Eve, they contrast Mary's
humility and obedience. In the economy
of our Redemption Mary, the second
Eve, was appointed by God to undo the
evil wrought by the first Eve. St. Irenaeus
thus expresses the mind of the Church
in the second century : " As Eve had
become the cause of death, so has Mary
become the cause of salvation to herself
and to the whole human race." St.
John Chrysostom in an Easter sermon
expresses his belief as follows in his own
vivid and picturesque way : " Let us all
rejoice today at the triumph of the Lord.
He has turned against Satan the arms
with which he once conquered. You ask
me how : I will tell you. A virgin, a
tree, and death represented our defeat ;
these three have all become for us principles of victory. In the place of Eve
we have Mary; in place of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, the wood
of the Cross ; in place of the death of
Adam, the death of the Saviour."
During the Marian Year we are called
on to honour especially Mary's unique
privilege in her Immaculate Conception.
But we should honour her, too, for the
essential, though subordinate part that
she, as the second Eve, played in the
salvation of the world. With full confidence
we can appeal to her whom the
Divine Saviour, at that most solemn
moment when His life was ebbing away
in agony, gave as Mother to us in the
person of St. John (John, XIX. 26-27).
We can thus be assured that in our
pilgrimage through life she will watch
over us with a mother's love and a
mother's tenderness. As the Holy Father
has said, " she who was the mother of
our Head according to the flesh, became
by a new title of sorrow and glory the
spiritual mother of all His members."
Almost from the beginning it has been
the practice of the Church to invoke the
intercession of our Blessed Lady. According
to the directions of an early hymn,
" all the saints shall say to thee as is
their duty : Pray for us, O thou who art
full of grace." St. Germanus of Constantinople
in an eloquent appeal addresses
her in words that anticipate some
of her titles in the Litany: " O Lady,
all-chaste, all-good, rich in mercy, comfort
of Christians, tender consoler of the
afflicted, the ever-open refuge of sinners,
do not leave us destitute of thy assistance."
Now that the infallible voice of
the Church has confirmed the age-long
belief that our Blessed Lady has been
assumed body and soul into Heaven, with
entire trust in her love for us we can
call on her to be our advocate before the
throne of her Divine Son. In the words
of Pius IX we can say of her that "exalted
above all the choirs of the angels
and the ranks of the saints, surely, she,
standing at the right hand of her Only Begotten
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and
with a mother's prayer, is most influential
in her intercession, and obtains what she
asks and cannot be refused." As Cardinal
Newman says in striking words,
" He wills according to her prayer, but
then she prays according to His Will."
While we go to Christ as the one Mediator,
we go to her as the most powerful and
favoured of intercessors, to whom none
of her children will appeal for help in
vain. Above all, if we pray to her in
life, she who is called the Mother of
Mercy and the Refuge of Sinners, will
come to our aid at the hour of death,
when we have to face the passage to
eternity and the judgment that awaits us.
Many tributes have been paid, even by
those outside the Catholic fold, to the
beneficent influence of Our Lady in
raising the status of womanhood in the
world, and in rescuing it from the degradation
into which it had fallen in pagan
times. She, who was the perfect embodiment of all the virtues, has exalted
and ennobled her sex, and invested it
with some of the glory with which she
herself is encompassed. The Church endeavours
to keep enshrined in the hearts
of her children the image of her who, as
Virgin and Mother, was revered as the
true type of womanly holiness, and as
the purest and highest exemplar of spiritual
beauty in human life. To the growing
girl, who has to live amidst the
temptations of the world, she teaches the
attractive power of modesty and refinement, of innocence and purity , as the
crowning glory of her sex. It has been
well said that through Mary the Church
has the power of making the young
heart chaste. In the moral anarchy of
today the figure of Mary Immaculate is
a source of strength and encouragement
to the young in their struggle to make
their lives conform to her own supreme
excellence, which free from defilement
reflects, in so far as it is possible in a
creature, the eternal purity of the Creator.
Mary is no less a model for the mother
in the home. Her Divine Maternity casts
a ray of splendour on every earthly
mother. In the humble dwelling at
Nazareth, as an artisan's wife, she sanctified
the common round of her daily tasks
by unselfish devotion and complete submission
to God's Will. In that home
there was an atmosphere of work and
prayer, of heavenly peace and harmony,
which helped to lighten the heaviest of
burdens and soften the bitterest of
sorrows. Particularly in the early days
of married life it is the mother's privilege
to guide her children's faltering steps,
and to direct their minds towards God
and the high destiny He has in store for
them. In such a task she reigns as the
queen and heart of the home. She should
realise the sacredness and dignity of her
calling. Great is the reward that God
will bestow on the mother who keeps
steadily before her the example of His
Blessed Mother, and who by her patience,
self-sacrifice, and spirit of prayer, endeavours
to maintain in her home, the
beauty and holiness of Christian family
life. When sorrows come, mothers should
turn for consolation to her who earned
the title of " Mother of the Afflicted "
in the hard school of affliction. Mary,
who through the fullness of God's Grace
was free from the smallest taint of sin,
was not dispensed from the law of suffering.
Even our heaviest cross will appear
light when compared with the sorrow
which she had to endure. From the day
of Simeon's prophecy her life might be
described as one of sorrow and laden
with anguish. In our tribulations we
should accompany her as she follows
the blood-stained foot steps of her Son to
Calvary, as she stands silently and uncomplainingly
beside the Cross during
His long agony, until the terrible moment
when His lifeless body was laid upon her
knees. In the trials that inevitably fall
to our lot in this vale of tears, the spectacle
of her, whom we venerate as the
" Mother of Sorrows," will be a source
of peace and comfort that will assuage
even the most poignant of our griefs.
She will teach us to re-echo the prayer
of our Divine Saviour in Gethsemani:
"Not My will but Thine be done." She
will show us how along the path of
suffering and sacrifice we can find our
way home to the blessed kingdom of
her Son.
As an act of homage to our Blessed
Lady we must strive to enter fully into
the spirit of the Marian Year. The Holy
Father, in proclaiming it, has proposed
a number of intentions for the fulfilment
of which we should pray earnestly,
making our prayers more acceptable to
God by uniting with them some act of
penance. He calls on the faithful to
intensify their devotion to the Holy
Mother of God, and to make their conduct
conform ever more closely to the pattern
of purity, integrity of life, and abhorrence
of sin exemplified in the life of
the Immaculate Virgin. We are asked
to pray that those who have fallen away
may return to the practice of the Christian Faith and the observance of the
Commandments, keeping in mind the
words which Mary spoke at the marriage
feast of Cana : " Whatsoever He shall
say to you, do ye" (John, II. 5). We
should invoke the powerful intercession
of our Immaculate Mother that she may
obtain from her Divine Son the assuagement
of the manifold evils which now
afflict society, the alleviation of the lot
of those who are still suffering hunger,
imprisonment, or exile, the removal of
hatred, envy, and discord among men,
that they may be once more united in
-charity, " which is the bond of perfection
" (Col. III . 14). We should pray for
the spiritual needs of the family and of
youth, and for the restoration of the
rights and liberties of the Church, which
in these days is so cruelly persecuted in
many lands. We should ask in particular
that God may strengthen and console
in their hour of trial those who, though
faced with torture or death, are heroically
bearing witness to their Divine Saviour.
We are urged to pray also that all who
profess allegiance to Christ, may again be
brought together in the unity of the one
Fold and the one Shepherd. As the world is
now witnessing rather an armed truce
than a solid and tranquil peace, it is the
Holy Father's desire that we should
earnestly seek the intercession of the
Most Blessed Virgin, who brought forth
the Prince of Peace, that she may obtain
from Him that true peace among the
nations that is guided by justice and
nurtured by charity.
This is a year in which many spiritual
benefits a re being offered to us. We may
rest assured that our Blessed Lady will
generously requite any effort that we
make to honour her whom God has so
greatly honoured. She, both because of
her close association with her Divine
Son in His redemptive mission and her
own surpassing merits, is in a most
favoured position to obtain from Him all
the help that we need during our period
of exile upon earth. We on our part can
make a return that will be particularly
pleasing to her, if we pledge ourselves to
be faithful to the practice of the Family
Rosary, to be said each evening at the
time most convenient for all the members
of the household. This devotion, in
which Mother and Son are so intimately
united, will promote goodwill and harmony
in the family, and obtain abundant
graces and blessings for parents and
children, so that through the powerful
intercession of the Immaculate Mother
of God the peace of Christ may reign in
your homes now and in the years to
come.
I remain,
Your faithful servant,
