There's a dear little plant
1643
The little settlement of New Amsterdam
at the foot of Manhattan Island was but
lazily alive in the warm sun of the
October morning. Smoke rose sluggishly
from the wooden chimneys above the high-peaked,
reed-thatched houses of the
burghers; and, since the light wind was
from the southeast, the new Church of
Saint Nicholas, within the fort, withheld it
from the long sails of the grist mill. They
stood motionless; and the goodwives,
brushing the dead sand from the fore-rooms
and kitchens on to their stoops and into the
streets, clacked together again indignantly
about the stupidity of Director General
Kieft in building the new church in such an
awkward spot. With the mill idle, flour
would be scarce again. Bad enough, this
year of 1643 , without unecessary vexations.
By the River Mauritius to the west, up
which Hendryk Hudson had sailed, little
knots of idlers puffing their long pipes,
lounged on the shore, watching indolently
for the possibility of fly boats bringing news
from Fort Orange, later to be called Albany,
away up the river. They had little else to do.
The sullen and persistent enmity of all the
neighbouring tribes had cut off all trading
with the Red Indians, and New Amsterdam
was essentially a trading-post. The West
India warehouses, usually at this time of year
piled high with bales of fur, otter and lynx
and beaver and fox and wolf, were almost
empty.
On the bowling green a troop of younger
men, recruited from the families of the
settlement and the men servants of the
bouweries, or great farms, to the north, were
drilling under the exasperated commands of
Sergeant Pieter Coeck from the regular
garrison at the fort. The townsfolk were still
somewhat uneasy, if a trifle placidly so,
about a possible Red Indian attack; for
there had been outcountry raids and killings
in the spring. 
Teig O'Driscoll watched the blunderings
of the heavy-footed militia with an inner
smile; but he was careful among the alien
group of lookers-on to keep his face composed.
The threat of Indian assault from the
tribes of the Raritans or the Tapaens or the
Tantitekes, or from all the encircling tribes
united, was real enough to make the
drilling important. It was only that the long,
full, baggy breeches and the floundering,
wooden work-shoes of the sweating and
earnest men of themselves mocked all the
sergeant's efforts to shout the wavering
lines into some precision. The standard-bearer
of the garrison, standing a little
distance from him, caught his eye and shook
his head, repudiating the awkward muster
with a friendly grin. He shifted his staff with
the drooping blue, white and orange banner
to his other hand, and made as if to walk
over and join Teig.
Instead, he turned the other way in
answer to a low call as a young woman
joined him. She carried a basket, evidently
of food, for she pulled up the flaps of his
wide uniform pockets and slipped packets
from the basket into them .. She was very
slim, and her hair was a sharply contrasted
black against the white of her cap, although
cap and short gown and green baize petticoat
were the same usual house garb of the
good vrouws of the settlement. Teig
wondered idly if she were truly Dutch. In
her looks and her more lithe and active
manner she was more like some of the
Spanish townswomen he had seen when he
was a student at Salamanca.
But loud shouting from the direction of
the River Mauritius checked his careless
speculation. It halted as well the futile
efforts of the sergeant; for the drilling men
broke ranks at once and hurried off the
green, without so much as by-your-leave,
to meet the shouting group of their elders
coming from the river.
Teig's bare smattering of Dutch was still
enough for him to understand that a large
vessel, a sloop rather than a herring buss,
was bearing down the river and soon would
be rounding the strand at the foot of the
island for the landing at Schreyer's Hoek.
Word had already been sent to Director
General Kieft; and a loud, harsh clacking
from the fort showed that the klopperman of
the watch had been aroused to sound his
rattle to alert the burghers. Manifestly the
ship carried passengers or news of more than
ordinary importance.
The little wharf and the strip of rock
beside it were crowded by the time Teig
made his leisurely way there; but he was
content to stand back at the edge of the
crowd. As the sloop nudged into the wharf
and the hawsers were flung to eager hands,
Teig could see by the dress of the men on the
deck that they were substantial and important
Fort Orange burghers. Several wore
the official broad-brimmed hats with the
silver bands that denoted that they were
schepens or aldermen. And several men on
shore cried out in greeting to a portly, red-faced
man who answered them with a rather
tipsy geniality. Teig was rather taken back
to hear him hailed as " Dominie"; but then
he recalled that at the City Tavern where he
was lodging he had heard that Dominie
Megapolensis of Rensselaerswyck, like
Dominie Evaradus Bogardus, whom he
knew by sight, believed in "a little wine for
the stomach's sake", especially if it were
good Rosa Solis.
But his eyes did not linger on the fat,
rubicund face of the Dutch pastor, who was
yelling lustily to Director General Kieft as
he made his testily pompous and important
way through the crowd. They were drawn
and held by the deep, sad eyes of a thin,
frail man in ill-fitting clothes who stood
quietly beside the exuberant pastor. His
features were attractively regular and his
expression of marked sweetness and kindliness;
but his face was drawn and haggard
and deeply lined with furrows. Yet for all it
was weatherbeaten and roughened, and
as copper-coloured as any Indian brave,
there was a strange luminosity about it, so
that in after years Teig remembered that
face as radiantly white and shining. Although
he was palpably a youngish man, perhaps in
his middle thirties, his hair was thin and
graying and his beard tired and straggly.
But it was his hands that made the crowd
murmur as he reached them to the rail as the
sloop banged skittishly against the wharf.
They were horribly mutilated, the fingers
twisted and deformed, with angry scars
where once there had been thumbs.
Here and there, from the grunting
comments of the burghers and the piping
chatter of their wives, Teig caught enough
words he knew to realize that the haggard
man with the saddened eyes was a French
priest who had been rescued from the cruel
captivity of the Mohawks. " Dominie - Dominie-"
he strained to catch the name,
" Dominie Isaak-Jogues".
The woman at the muster who had
looked Spanish to him pressed near him;
he saw that her hands, lifted to her throat,
" ... and raised his crippled right hand-as if in a blessing."
were twisting in concern or compassion.
As the priest came slowly through the
throng which was pressed back into a lane
by the pompous strut of Director Kieft and
the waddle of Dominie Megapolensis, the
woman's hands parted and she blessed
herself quickly.
Then she looked about hastily and somewhat
furtively; but when she saw that Teig
alone had observed her she gave him a
timid, pleading smile. He did not know
quite what moved him to do it- Irish
gallantry or recklessness-but he raised his
own right hand and made a bold, unmistakable
Sign of the Cross; then, oddly
moved by his unconsidered act, called out
to the priest in his loudest voice, "Cead mile
failte, a shaggairt aruin!"
He cursed himself inwardly after for
making such an omadhaun of himself. Yet
oddly, although the Frenchman, priest or
no, could hardly by any possible means have
the Gaelic, he halted in his shy, gentle walk
behind the dignitaries and raised his crippled
right hand-as if in a blessing. That truly it
was in blessing Teig recognized tardily when
his eye caught the Spanish-like woman, her
timidity thrown off, rising from a deep
court-curtsy-or, he thought angrily, a
reverent genuflexion. His own mood of
respect had changed and he stared now at
the priest only with cold insolence.
Teig drank deeply that night at the City
Tavern, where he found the priest also was
lodged; but when the taproom talk rose
highest about the tortured hands and the
rescue from the savagery of the Mohawks
he pushed his pewter mug aside in choking
irritation and swerved out and through the
settlement to drink with the rougher,
rowdier crowd at the Sign of the Golden
Lion.
But even there, as the lesser men of the
community and the sailors from the ships in
the harbour caroused noisily, the talk was all
of the French priest. The wind had risen; it
guttered the candles and moaned into the
taproom whenever the outer door was
opened. Teig shrugged off uneasily a weird
thought that a relentless hound was dogging
his steps and gnawing at the air about his
heart. He blamed the priest for his restlessness.
In the succeeding days, Teig went far out
of his way to keep from meeting, or even
encountering, Father Jogues. But one
morning as he was strolling along the canal
path he saw the priest coming toward him.
The footbridge across the Heere Gracht was
too far away for Teig to reach it and cut
away from the path of the gently pacing
man, obviously reading his Office or a book
of devotions.
But mercifully there was an interruption
to the priest's progress; fortunately rather
than mercifully, Teig corrected his thought,
in his black mood thrusting aside the
momentary recognition of mercy and its
eternal source. By hurrying he was able to
reach the footbridge and start across it.
Yet despite himself he was impelled to
turn halfway and look back. A young lad
running furiously had halted the priest with
breathless cries. As he reached Father Jogues
he fell on his knees before him, and reaching
up to the priest's mutilated hands he kissed
them fervently. Teig bit his lips angrily in
some odd, moving feeling he did not want
to recognize as the boy cried out in queerly
accented Dutch, "O Martyr! O Martyr of
Christ Jesus!" Teig turned contemptuously
away; but not before he also heard, in
answer to the priest's halting questioning,
that the boy was a bond servant, a Pole and
strangely not a Catholic but a Lutheran. A
Lutheran kissing the hands of a papist
priest! Not even a stray or strayed Catholic!
The Irishman felt wetness on his chin; when
he put his hand up he found he had bitten
his lower lip until it was bleeding.
One night at the Golden Lion, when the
suddenly opening door made the rushlights
and candles flicker in the haze of tobacco
smoke and everyone looked up, he saw that
it was the garrison standard-bearer bulking
hazily under the lintel. The man's eyes
searched about; then surprisingly he came
toward Teig with a lusty shout of good
fellowship.
"Mynheer", he cried, smiling warmly,
"by my house is schnapps that is more better.
Mine vrouw, mine wife, she ask if you will
come by my house. My wife", he leaned
over the table with a cautious look about
him, "my wife, she is ... ". He hurriedly
traced a cross on Teig's coat, above the
heart.
Teig silently cursed the folly that had
made him so wantonly conspicuous, and
hypocritically so at that, when the priest had
landed from the sloop. If it had not been for
that strange, sudden something that had
moved him without his will, he would more
readily have mocked at the priest and jeered
at his wounds. In a few black moments as
the Dutchman stood over him, waiting, he
re-lived the dark anguish of his soul when
word had come to him at Salamanca of the
ruthless slaughter of his family and all his
kin, even to the servants in the byre and
the fields, in Strafford' s savage retaliation
against the innocent and the valiant, alike,
after the Irish Rising of 1641. That night
he had bitterly thrust from his soul and his
heart all allegiance to a God whom he felt
had so cruelly and senselessly betrayed the
love and trust he had borne Him.
But his native manners made him shake
off his brooding and answer the Dutch
soldier courteously, refusing the invitation
as politely as possible. Corporal Hendryk
Pietersen, for he named himself in a burst of
good will, would not be denied. In the end,
Teig rose wearily to accompany him, rather
than enter into what might seem to the
tavern hangers-on to be a drunken altercation.
Pietersen lived outside the fort, in a
shabby but neat little house on Parel Street.
He attempted a Dutch joke and looked
eagerly at the Irishman to see if he understood.
His street-Parel-was the Pearl
Street and of all the women on the street it
was his wife who was most like such a jewel.
Teig half expected that good Vrouw
Pietersen might even be named Margaret - or
Margarida rather, when he learned that
she was Portuguese. But her husband called
her Cornelia, which was Dutch enough, as
well as Roman, to be a bit confusing.
It started off as a pleasant enough evening.
Teig smilingly decided for Rosa Solis rather
than for the Holland gin that Pietersen
proudly unearthed from the rudely carved
kas or chest in the fore-room; and the
woman flashed him a gleaming smile of
approval, tousling her husband's tow head
because he refused to replace the stone-ware
schnapps jug. She clapped her hands in
delight when Teig spoke to her in Spanish.
Her Portuguese poured forth at once, and
they found that except for little word
divergences they could talk to each other
easily. Hendryk Pietersen sat back with his
cup and beamed at them.
His wife was rapturous when she learned
that Teig knew Belem, the town of her
birth close by the Jeronimos, the church
and monastery of Santa Maria. She
chattered eagerly of Lisbon and how she felt
such a saudade, a longing, for its bustle.
She began to talk of some of the great
Portuguese shrines, that of the Born Jesus at
Braga and of the Madre de Deus in Lisbon.
Teig was afraid she was leading into talk
about Father Jogues and he wanted none of
that, so he asked her quickly how it was, for
a Portuguese, she was so strangely named
Cornelia.
"Not Cornelia, no-only in his head",
she shook her own chidingly at her husband.
"I am truly Maria-but Maria Conceicao.
In the Spanish, let me think-Concepcion?
A special name of her birth for Nossa Senhora
Madre de Born Jesus. But see-this tells all".
She darted across the room and came
back with two pictures from the fireplace
mantel. That of a comely youth in a fluted
ruff she identified as the holy Luiz de
Gonzague. The other-of the Blessed Virgin
-brought a searing pain that stabbed at
Teig's heart; his eyes blinded with quick,
scalding tears. It was a copy of the same
Zurburan Madonna beneath which his
mother had daily knelt in her private closet,
her rosary of amber beads on their silken
cord twisting between her fingers as she
prayed. It was so he most remembered her.
He was never sure afterwards how he had
got away from the kindliness of the
Pietersens. He dimly recalled muttering of a
headache and a sudden attack of malaise
from an old fever. They saw that he was in
distress and despite their disappointment did
not press him too strongly to stay on.
He plunged away from their friendly
door heedless of where he was going, just
out into the protecting night. A heavy rain
fell and soaked his clothes, but he ignored it.
He moved on and on, sometimes half
running as if a hound were indeed pursuing
him. In the morning when it was dawn and
clearing he found that he had made his way
far up the island, even past the last outlying
bouwerie of the rich Swede, Jonas Bronck.
He stopped at the farmhouse, Emmaus, on
his way back to the settlement. Bronck's
good vrouw, Antonia, fussed over his wet
coat and smallclothes and gave him a
warming breakfast.
Teig had no reason for prolonging his
stay in Nieuw Amsterdam. A year ago,
when in frenzy and anguish he had abruptly
cut short his university studies he had left
Spain as soon as he could for Florida and the
new world of the Americas. From St.
Augustine he had journeyed up the coast to
Maryland and then to Virginia with some
idea of acting as a tutor in a wealthy
colonial family. But he could not reconcile
himself, as an Irish gentleman of quality, to
being even slightly subservient to those he
considered lesser gentry, no matter how
broad their lands. And also he saw Strafford
in so many of the planters' faces. Nieuw
Amsterdam had been but a stop on the way
to New England where among Dissenters
he thought he might profitably start a
school of his own.
And yet he stayed on and on with an odd
compulsive feeling. He avoided the
Pietersens as zealously as he did the priest;
yet, late at night, so strangely, he often
found himself in the dark watching the
flickering light from Father Jogues's
window. After such vigils he drove himself
on long tramps into the countryside, heedless
of Indian alarums or excursions. Yet
tired and spent as his body was at night, the
turmoil in his mind would not let him sleep.
He was one, he felt, with the holy Juan de
la Cruz, who had written so vividly, as he
had learned at Salamanca, of just such dark
nights of the soul. He was sure that his
mind's torment would cease somehow once
the French priest took sail on the small,
three-masted barque that was already under
lading for the trip overseas to old Amsterdam.
But he scorned as cowardice any thought of
leaving the settlement before the priest took
ship.
The night before the barque was to sail, the
bitter young Irishman, on a prolonged
wandering in the northern woodlands, had
worked himself into such a fury against
Father Jogues, impotent and senseless as he
knew it to be, that, when he reached the
City Tavern on his return, he dashed
headlong through the taproom and up the
stairs to bang furiously on the priest's
door.
Father Jogues opened it at once, almost as
if he had been expecting Teig.
"Come in, my son!" The voice was
unutterably sweet and gentle. "I have been
awaiting you all evening. Once- among the
Hurons-I pleaded with God for a sign of
His divine love. The answer that came to me
then may I not now give to you: 'Thy
prayer is heard. Be it done to thee as thou
hast asked. Be comforted, be of strong
heart'."
"But it was not this I asked, priest", Teig
meant to thunder angrily; but his voice
came out in a whisper.
"It was what your soul was asking, but
you would not let yourself listen and hear.
It is what those who loved you so dearly
on earth are continually asking for you in
Heaven. The true, deep desire of your soul
was blurred to you; but God sees all things
clearly. He told me you would come to me.
He and I have been waiting for you" .
The priest drew Teig gently into the
room. "I have something to show you, if
there can still be any doubt in your heart of
the infinite mercy and love of God; and of
His so infinite understanding.
"That day on the footpath by the canal
I saw you were so anxious to avoid me and
I wondered at it sadly, because of your so
happy welcome to me at the sloop's landing.
I walked to the spot where you had stood in
indecision whether to turn about and flee
me or to try and reach the footbridge. I
stood where you had stood; and I offered
my poor prayers for you and for your
unhappy country, of whose sorrows I know
somewhat. I prayed God that whatever
there was of bitterness or grievous anguish
within your heart might be washed away
by His redeeming love. And as with my
head bowed I prayed, I saw beside the path
amidst the grasses what I felt was a certain
sign that you would bring your burden to
me that God might lift it from you" .
Father Jogues reached to a table behind
him and from a shallow pewter dish lifted
and held out to Teig a little clump of richly
green, three-leaved clover. He placed them
in the youth's hands as carefully as if they
were precious emeralds.
"In my native Orleans", he said softly,
"we learn early of the great Bishop Patrick
and how he explained the mystery of the
Most Holy Trinity".
But the young Irishman was down on his
knees, sobbing convulsively. Yet through
and over his heart-wracked sobs his voice
rose clear, " Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, beatae
Mariae, semper Virgini ... ".
A shining light radiated from the priest's
face and his mutilated hands seemed young
and whole as he waited to raise them in
absolution and benediction.

Saint Patrick himself sure that set it
1778
John Fitzgerald hastily spilled sand front
its pewter shaker over the army order he
had been transcribing and stood to attention
as he heard the outer door open and the
heavy, military step in the hallway. For all
their long and intimate friendship, from the
days when he had been a Burgess in
Alexandria and they had drunk wine
together, when George would come over
on plantation business from Mount Vernon,
John was always meticulous, even when
they were alone, in observing proper
military etiquette. And the General seemed
to approve that it should be so.
This morning John recognized a lightness
and springiness in the General's step that
had been too often absent in these past soul-searing
months at Valley Forge. He was not
too unprepared for the affectionate slap on
the shoulder and the "John" that followed
the General's "Good morning!" instead of
the customary "Colonel". But a certain
almost teasing quality in the General's
s1nilc, not very frequent these days, surprised
him. The General could be the
pleasantest of companions, but he was very
rarely jovial, even in wine and in happier
days.
"The outlook for today, John", the
General said, as he shook off his heavy
camlet cloak, "is chiefly-mud! Thank
God, the back of the winter and its terrifying
cold is broken; but this chill rain is
wellnigh as hard on the men's spirits. I
wonder how they can lift them at all. Yet,
this morning, when I walked to the parade
ground to see Von Steuben start his drilling,
one brave fellow I passed-one of your
countrymen, no doubt, John-called out to
another, 'How be ye?’ And cheerfully back
came the gay reply, 'All wet, thanks. Hope
you're the same'."
"What have you there, John?"
" It is the order, sir, for the enlargement
of your bodyguard and the list of selected,
men.
"Oh, yes. I hardly think it's necessary but
Gibbs and Stryker urged it, and the Baron
was almost insistent. They're taking great
care that Lord Cornwallis won't live up to
his promise 'to bag the old fox'. Now let me
see: ... 'that one hundred chosen men be
annexed to the Guard for the purpose of
forming a Corps to be instructed in
manoeuvres to be introduced into the Army
and serve as a model for the execution of
them'. Von Steuben surely had a hand in
phrasing that; the drill-master speaks . And
now-the list of men. An interesting list.
Appropriate for the day, don't you think,
John?"
Fitzgerald looked up rather blankly. The
General was in a strange humour this
morning.
Washington laughed aloud. "My dear
Colonel, as my eye ran down the roster for
this special Guard I saw Jeremiah Driscoll,
William Hennessey, William O'Neil, Hugh
Haggerty, Michael Lynch, Dennis Moriarty,
John Leary, Edward Whelan-and Thomas
McCarthy, of the same last name as my own
cousin and your and my dear friend,
Captain Daniel. Do you wonder that I
looked at once for the date?
"And yet I have so, so much work for you
all day, John, and mayhap late into the
night. Surely I may trust that you had made
no especial plans for the day, John. It would
be such a pity! Had you made any, dear
John?"
"Nothing important, sir. If it had been a
light day, Colonel Moylan and I thought
that perhaps-but it really doesn't matter,
Sir.”
"You shock me, Colonel. Those are
sentiments fit for Lord Cornwallis or even
for King George, but never for a man from
-where was it-Wicklow? If Steve
Moy Ian's brother, the good Bishop of Cork,
heard you say that, he'd be right to read
you out of your Catholic meeting. Saint
Patrick's Day! And the man says it doesn't
matter ! It would be proper and fitting to
name such an Irishman as Officer of the
Day. But not to honour him as I did
General Sullivan at Boston," General
Washington's voice grew very stern, " but
rather to confine him to the camp as duty
officer. Colonel Fitzgerald, prepare to take
down my General Orders for the day".
John Fitzgerald stared up at the tall figure,
completely bewildered by the General's
quick change of tone. He hoped to glimpse
the quizzical look that Washington sometimes
allowed himself in dignified chaffing
of his younger officers; but the strong jaw
was set and the mouth stretched forbiddingly
over the cumbersome teeth that
caused the General such discomfort when he
clamped his lips together as he was doing
now. The aide-de-camp hurriedly pulled a
sheet of paper toward him and dipped his
quill in the pewter inkhorn. General
Washington glared down at him.
"The Officer of this day", the General
began portentously, "will be- ". He paused
and weighed the matter. Fitzgerald felt he
knew too well what was coming. By the
Lord Harry, how bad he gotten himself into
this mess? How Steve Moylan and the
others would jeer at him! He was too good
a soldier to show any palpable emotion but
his shoulders twitched unconsciously as he
held back a sigh of deep disappointment.
"The Officer of this day will be-Oh, John,
John, let's make it Von Steuben, in revenge
for the Battle of the Boyne Water!"
Washington clapped him fondly on the
shoulder. "But the parole word shall be
'Saint' and the countersign, 'Patrick'. And
Colonel Fitzgerald and Colonel Moylan and
Harry Lee and the rest of you Irishers may
be off as soon as may be for Philadelphia
'to drown the shamrock' with my blessing.
Tell James Byrne at the Golden Fleece he's
not to water the wine. And convey to the
gentlemen of the Friendly Sons of Saint
Patrick my most cordial sentiments and
my warmest appreciation of their adherence
to the glorious cause in which we are
embarked".
Fitzgerald turned squarely about and
openly grinned at a comrade-at-arms rather
than at a commander-in-chief. Washington
smiled his slow, heavy smile and chuckled.
"I don't know why, John, I felt I should
allow myself this jest. But it has been a
winter to try us all and you have been so
loyal and faithful it seemed right that we
should have a chance to laugh together as
we were wont to in happier times. But you
and Stephen Moylan might stop into your
Saint Mary's and say a prayer to the good
Saint Patrick for me-for us all. I have
found prayer the only thing to ease my
mind this hard, hard winter. But you know
that. I have seen you slip away your chaplet
of beads when I have come in from my own
way of communion with the Almighty. It
heartened me to know that you were one
with me in this, as in so many other things.
"Dash those orders off quickly. I'll ride
down to the parade ground with you to tell
the Baron of the inestimable honour I have
conferred upon him, and to wave you lads
off. You see, earlier today I ran into Count
de Roche Fermoy, who should be in the
Regiment de Dillon or the Regiment de Walsh
rather than in that of Bourbonnais. For
though he is ten times as French as the
Marquis de Lafayette he was flopping all
around Von Steuben this morning-patting
his chest and telling everyone in sight that
he was 'the son of a wild goose', and that
you and he were going to make the many,
many Irish toasts tonight. The combination
of 'goose' and 'toast', after our poor camp
fare, had the Baron's mouth watering. I'm
sure he thinks you are to dine on canvasbacks
or whatever is the equivalent in his
homeland. Is there such a thing as a Strasbourg
goose, or did I hear him aright? Between his
accent and Fermoy's it's no wonder that I
was put in the mood for a jest".
The rain had somewhat lifted but came
in sudden gusts as, wrapped in their heavy
cloaks, they rode in the mud through the
lines of wooden huts and crudely fashioned
cabins of clay- plastered logs. As they passed
along "one company street" the General
commented upon the little leafy sprays of
green in the men's wet, tattered hats.
"The Pennsylvania Line", said Fitzgerald.
" Light Horse Harry Lee says it should be
called the Line of Ireland. In some of the
companies there is nothing but Irish and
they all have a sizable quota". General
Washington nodded in assent and the rain
was shaken in spray from the flaps of his
cocked hat.
Near the end of the straggling huts of the
Pennsylvania companies Washington's horse
shied slightly as a small, wiry figure darted
across in front of him in the mud and disappeared
into one of the cabins. The General
pulled up his horse. He was every bit the
commander now, alert to even the smallest
thing that concerned the army under his
leadership.
"Colonel, something odd is going on
here. That man has been dodging back and
forth in the rain since we entered the
company area". He twisted about on his
saddle. "There are little knots of men
gathered behind us, all seemingly arguing.
I'll ride on a ways in case it's some private
matter that shouldn't concern me. But do
you quiz this lad-this obvious messenger - and
then catch up to me. It's well to know
if there's any special disaffection amongst
the men. Beyond lack of food and clothes" ,
he added rather bitterly. " Poor fellows!
At times you'd wonder if it were the British
or the Congress are our enemies".
Fitzgerald wheeled his horse sharply to
cut off the thin figure that tried again to
dart across the road.
" Here there, what are you up to? What's
going on here? What's your name, soldier,
and your outfit? "
It was a frightened boy, hardly more
than fourteen Fitzgerald judged in a sharp,
quick glance that also noted with an instant
of kinship that the lad in his alarm at being
accosted had made a reassuring Sign of the
Cross on his breast. The boy pulled off
his hat in an unmilitary gesture and his
fiery red hair was made even more tousled
by the rainy wind. The hair stirred recollection
in Fitzgerald's mind.
“ John Mullowney, sir. I'm a drummer
boy serving with the Philadelphia militia,
Sir  " 
" Drummer? Now I know! You're the
lad that rallied the line and helped save the
day at Princeton with your wild pounding
out of Yankee Doodle. By the Lord Harry,
the rattle of your sticks then was like
welcome gunnery. The General said afterwards
you were as good as ten field pieces.
He told the artillery he'd not miss cannon if
he could muster a company of drummers
like you". Fitzgerald remembered ruefully
that Washington had asked him to try to
find out who the drummer was, but it had
slipped his mind.
The lad's face flushed as red as his hair.
"Sure, I just did my best, sir. You sec, I'm.
Irish-so I have an extra reason not to like
the lobster-backs. I couldn't stand seeing us
fall back before them. And it's a tune I know
especially well, I do", he added with what
Fitzgerald accepted as youth's irrelevancy,
although the youth had given the words
grave, nodding emphasis.
" So you're Irish, eh? More power to you.
For so am I- Colonel Fitzgerald. But what's
an Irish boy like you doing, running around
up to mischief this day of all days? Don't
you know this is Saint Patrick's Day?
Aren't you a Catholic, like myself?"
"Indeed and I am, sir-Colonel, sir. And
if it was at home I was I'd have been up the
mountain long since, kneeling at the Mass
rock before dawn. It's bad over there for
the likes of us, sir ; but I never expected to
be made fun of over here, mocked and
jeered at, right here in this camp. Indeed,
we'll not put up with it, sir", he said with an
old man's gravity. 'Tis no ways right, and
you wouldn't like it, either".
Fitzgerald had noticed little groups of
soldiers slipping by as he talked with the
boy. They had a secret air about them that
was not furtive but that even in his casual
glances he had felt carried something of
outraged pride and determination.
"See here, Mullowney, come, come
quickly! Tell me what this is all about. Out
with it, boy!"
"Well, sir, it's Saint Patrick's Day and
some of them Dutchmen that's in our own
line, but who back home would have been
for King Billy instead of James of the
Fleeing- well, they made a horrible figure,
sir, stuffed with straw. They're showing it
all around the camp, sir, calling it a 'Paddy',
making mock like of Saint Patrick, sir. It's
the way we don't think they got it up all of
themselves, either. We know it's the
'Yankee Doodles' from up New England
put them up to it. So we're getting together,
sir, and we're going to knock the stuffing
out of the whole lot of them. 'Twill be well
worth your watching, sir", the boy said
earnestly, "We've even got a rallying call.
I've had some schooling so 'twas I who
thought it up. Instead of 'To Hell or
Connaught', our cry will be 'To Hell with
Cromwell'. That's where he'd be, sir, old
Noll, and they're his spitting images".
"Good Heavens", cried Fitzgerald. "Boy,
boy, do you know what you're doing! We
can't have this! Those men that passed were
armed .. . ".
"Sure, 'tis only buckshot, sir, and only to
shoot at their-to shoot at them when they
run, sir. We'll fight fair, sir, be sure of
that".
"No, NO! Here, grasp this stirrup. Run
alongside of me. I can't go too fast for you
in this confounded mud. We've got to stop
this-stop it before it gets completely out
of hand".
Colonel Fitzgerald was so aroused by the
boy's story that momentarily he forgot that
General Washington had said he would
halt on ahead. He was nonplussed to find the
General on his white horse waiting patiently
in the rain at a turn of the road. He drew up
and hastily reported what the boy had told
him.
Washington's face grew very grave.
"Ride on swiftly ahead, Colonel, and see
whether this sad affair threatens to be
serious. I would not for the world have a
thing like this start. Those stupid fools! Take
the boy with you. Send him running back if
and when you think it might be wise for me
to take a hand. But get Moylan and whomever
else you can round up to help appease
these men. I can appreciate their anger. Tell
Von Steuben to order those Pe1msylvania
kinsmen of his on to the drill field, and the
New Englanders, too, if you can find one of
their general officers. Tell him to drill this
nonsense out of them; and to keep on
drilling them until I see fit to countermand
my order".
When Fitzgerald had ridden off, young
Mullowney at his stirrup, Washington dismounted
and walked his horse back and
forth. The animal had become restless fron1
standing in the rain. Besides the General felt
that perhaps this situation was one that
needed prayer. He thought of it, in his
soldier's fashion, as talking over his tactics
with God.
He knew how men's prejudices, enlarged
and played upon, could well bring serious
disaffection in the army's ranks. Holding the
men together in unity was difficult as it was,
what with short-term enlistments and
farmers impatient now, with spring ahead,
to go home and plant their crops. The
terrible rigours of the winter at Valley
Forge had brought the hearts and spirits of
the men almost to breaking. It would take
so little to bring ugly, blind, unreasoning,
personal passions frighteningly into the
open-a spark from a flint on ready
tinder.
In this instance he did not wholly blame
the Germans, although he was wrathful at
their dunderpated stupidity. They were
merely gulls. The New Englanders were
more suspect. He knew that many of them
were still fanatical in their irrational Puritan
hatred of popery and papists. Yet to give
them the benefit of the doubt-for General
John Sullivan, Irish if not papist, had no
trouble with them-it was more than likely
that British agents provocateurs had worked
upon them, as they in turn had been able to
play upon the Germans' stupidity.
He knew that Lord North's secret agents
were everywhere in the army; he knew also
that North was disturbed by the sympathy
in Ireland for the Continental cause. It
would be a master stroke to foster antagonism
against the Irish soldiers in the
American army, with its consequent fiery
resentment; and then spread the news out
from Dublin Castle effectually to quell any
sympathetic Irish rebellion. The consequences
of even this present unhappy
incident could be grave and far-reaching.
On a rough estimate, half the army was
Irish-born or of one immediate generation
removed; and heading the professional
trained soldiers-so sorely needed-were
the two crack regiments of the French Irish
Brigade, the Regiments Walsh and Dillon,
made up of men with long memories who
had never lost their Irishry. This sort of
thing, if it grew out of hand, those fiery
chevaliers would never understand, nor of
their pride of race would they take it lightly.
Washington had seen John Fitzgerald's own
flushed face and tightened jaw muscles; and
he knew the towering rages that could
consume gentle Stephen Moylan on a point
of personal honour like this concerning his
blood and his religion.
"Please, sir. Please, your-your Lord
Excellency", the red-headed drummer boy
called out as he came running and panting
down the company street. "Please, sir, the
Colonel Fitzgerald said it would be well if
you came. Them others is quieted down.
We got the 'Paddy' away from them; but
the Colonel says, sir, it would take a greater
hand than his to appease our side. We're
good and mad, sir", he said ingenuously.
Washing ton swung to his saddle and
gestured with his crop for the boy to
accompany him. The General held his horse
to a walk. The distance to the parade ground
was not far. Nor would it do to come
charging into an angered mob of soldiers,
ready to throw off the last bonds of discipline,
and let them think that their headstrongness
had brought the weakness of
alarm to their commander-in-chief It was
hard sometimes to remain seemingly cold
and lofty and aloof; but Washington knew
that the men somehow expected that in
their supreme leader. The General knew that
it was part of the secret of his hold over the
army, and even over some of his general
officers.
Looking down he saw that the young
drummer boy was as nervously eager to
hurry as, privately, he was himself To calm
the boy and pass the impatient moments, he
began a pleasantly dignified chat with the
lad, who, Fitzgerald had said, was worth
watching. The boy's answers pleased him.
"But now tell me", he said quizzically,
"why is it that it always seems to rain on
Saint Patrick's day? I don't quite recall the
weather last year, but I remember well it did
the year before, when we evacuated
Boston".
Young Mullowney gave sober answer.
"My old grandmother used to say, sir, that
it was the holy angels weeping for the
sorrows of Ireland".
The General went to speak; but, only a
short distance now ahead, the hubbub and
tumult of angry, shouting voices rose higher
in violence and volume.
"You've your drum there, boy?''
"Indeed, sir, I have to cart it with me
always, but well covered. There's them as
has taking ways, sir".
" Unsheathe it then, at once! Go ahead of
me at a quickstep! Pound out some vigorous
rataplan that will make them give way
before you. Just as at Princeton. What was
it then? Oh, Yankee Doodle. No, that would
hardly do. Choose your own tune-but
beat, beat it out!"
"I'll play the one yon said, sir. 'Twill do
very well. 'Tis my own favourite-and
that's only the name they call it. So 'twill
serve both sides".
The stratagem began surprisingly well,
Washington saw exultantly. The men fell
back in consternation, their clenched fists
falling, their shouting dying away as
Drummer-boy Mullowney, his head cocked
proudly and jauntily, beat his way with gay
insistence to the open space between the two
quarrelling factions of the soldiers. Fitzgerald
was riding up and down, vainly trying to
calm down the tempers of the embattled
Irish so that Von Steuben might march
away the Germans and the New Englanders
that he was cursing into drill formations.
Behind the drummer, at what he felt was
a suitable distance, General Washington
slowly paced his white charger. He had
thrown back his cloak to display his
epaulettes and the bright buttons and buff
facings of his uniform. His head held high,
he bowed with the dignity of his authority,
right and left, as if the men had assembled
for the single purpose of doing him honour,
and he was approaching in turn to repay the
compliment.
He nodded with great gravity to
Fitzgerald as he rode to him. Then he
wheeled his horse calmly and slowly to face
the ranks of the greater crowd, the Irish
from the Pennsylvania and the Delaware
and the Maryland and Virginia Lines.
Young Mullowney was inspired to beat a
stirring ruffle and flourish. As its reverberations
died away in what was now
a somewhat uneasy stillness, General
"Behind the drummer . .. General Washington
slowly paced his white charger"
Washington lifted his hand and began to
peak in slow and measured but warm and
kindly tones:
" You, gentlemen, my comrades-at-arms,
are no doubt very properly gathered
fittingly to honour Saint Patrick, the great
saint of Ireland. I, too, am a lover of
Saint Patrick's Day and have many times
observed it with my friends and kinsmen
of the Irish nation.
" If there be McCarthys among you - and
by the stir I see there are- none of my
close kinsfolk are dearer to me in the ties
of affection than my five second cousins
who proudly bear that historic Irish name.
It is an affection I inherit from my father,
who chose their father, his good friend, to be
an executor of his will and testament. And
of my patrimony, a goodly part was
bequeathed to my father by his valued
friend, Mistress Elizabeth Hurley of
Westmoreland.
" If there be Sullivans among you- and
there are, surely-to no man do I grant
higher honour or esteem than to the
loyalest of my general officers, General
John Sullivan. And among my officers your leaders-I have most deeply regretted
the untimely death of General Richard
Montgomery, born in the County Donegal.
And at the outset of the war I pressed the
Congress that the chief command of the
army be given not to me but to a worthier
soldier, General Andrew Lewis of Donegal,
also a rebel fugitive from Ireland.
" Beside me is my good Colonel
Fitzgerald, who as my aide and secretary is
close in my counsels, as was Colonel
Moylan who now commands the Fourth
Pennsylvania Cavalry with great distinction;
both, my aides and my friends. Colonel
Fitzgerald, you should know, is from
Wicklow County and Colonel Moylan
from Cork, where his brother is the august
Catholic Bishop of the city and his sister an
Ursuline Lady Abbess.
"I cherish the devotion to our cause of all
true Irishmen like these and like yourselves .
As I have said, I, too, am a lover of Saint
Patrick's Day. I wish all the army to keep the
day; so I hereby order a cessation of all
fatigue and working parties, and an extra
dram to be given out to every man here in
my comm and to drink to Saint Patrick and
the nation of Ireland".
The huzzas were uproarious; men jumped
and shouted and waved their caps and their
arms as the General nodded to Fitzgerald
and made his way benignly through the
jubilant clamour ringing about him. And
high above all the other noise came the
joyous rattling of a solitary drum.
" To be altogether fair, John", General
Washington said, when the wild celebrating
was well behind them, “you might countermand
that drill order to Van Steuben before
you leave for Philadelphia and your own
jollification. But tell me, why does that
young Mullowney, who so obviously dislikes
our Puritan New Englanders, delight
so in pounding out Yankee Doodle ? They
consider that their very own marching
tune.”
" Ah, but he doesn't, you see, George",
John Fitzgerald purposefully all owed himself
the old intimate familiarity. "He
considers they have a right only to the
words set to the tune now. No. What
delights him is beating out the old original
Irish air. Not for a moment is he rattling
out Yankee Doodle. For him the air is All the
Way to Galway".
Author’s note: This story follows historical fact in almost every particular, with
but slight fictional re-arrangement. George Washington had great affection and esteem
for his Irish friends and their Faith. All the persons named stood in relation to him exactly
as they are given in this story.

... Sweet little shamrock of Ireland
-1867 and 1937-
It was the eve of The Day We Celebrate Saint
Patrick's Day, of course, no more and
no less. Outside on St. Mary's Street, cold,
chill New England March winds blustered
up and down; but Paddy Dailey's barber
shop was snug and warm and cozy. It was
here that the elder statesmen of the old
parish, the ancients of days, would foregather
in those waning hours before supper
that stretched long for old men- to discuss
and settle, for themselves at least, the affairs
of city, state and nation.
Year by year the circle grew smaller. And
for a time the parish elders hadn't it in their
hearts to meet at all. That was after the
passing to God and His glory of John
Gabriel Sullivan, their undisputed leader,
by common consent and his own, a man
among men. In the old parish, which stems
largely from West Cork, and Berehaven in
particular, there are more Sullivans than
you could shake a stick at- if you ever
dared to do such a foolhardy thing. But the
Sullivan of Sullivans was ever the Pope's
Johnny. In his case it was not so much a
nickname like Pretty Dinny or Johnny
Shoes, the cobbler, or Handsome Dan on
police point duty; but rather a title of awe
and distinction. For John Gabriel Sullivanwe
had his word for it- had been the close,
intimate, very personal friend and chum of a
Holy Father the Pope-Pope Pius the Ninth,
indeed, him that came before Leo.
The old men were talking of him this day
for few days ever went by without some
mention of a man so honoured by such a
friendship, yet who never lost the common
touch.
Old Ned Harrington brought it up when
in his quavering voice he wondered aloud
in a silence whether or no it would rain on
the morrow.
"My rheumatism says so", put forth
Dinnie Shea, "it's acting up as though
'twould rain and rain good. Indeed, I can
hardly put me in mind of a Patrick's Day
when it didn't rain, or snow for that matter,
and what's snow but rain frozen".
" It's like the Pope's Johnny always said",
contributed Larry O'Toole, who is a man
to be harkened to since it is a known fact
that he is nephew away back to a holy saint
of the same last name, "it's what he always
maintained-and no man was in a better
position to know, from his connections - that
not until Ireland is free, from north to
south and the centre to the sea, completely
free and a nation once again will Saint
Patrick's Day ever be truly what you would
call sunny and fair. The rain is given to us
by Almighty God and our holy Apostle to
serve as a reminder".
At the mention of John Gabriel Sullivan
there was the hush that always came, a quiet
that meant murmured prayers for the repose
of the soul of a man who, although he had
been all in all with a Holy Father, had been a
good friend to plain men, too.
"I guess", Ned Harrington spoke at last
with a perceptible quaver in his thin, high,
old voice, "it puts me in mind, it surely
docs, of the story Johnny used to tell of how
he celebrated Saint Patrick's Day that time
in holy Rome years ago when he went over
with the Papal Zouaves from Canada to
protect and defend the Holy Father from the
Garibaldi Orangemen" .
"If there was a time and a place to hear
that story again, this is it, surely", said Larry
O'Toole. "The eve of The Day and the lot
of us gathered together with that thought in
all our minds. You wouldn't be in such a
great hurry now to clear us out, Patrick,
would you?"
" Not at all, not at all. I would not,
indeed", said Paddy, " I've been on my feet
all day and there's nothing I'd like better
than to sit down and take the load off of
them. And the wife never starts to wet the
tea until I come in the door. Go on with the
story, Neddie boy. ' Twill make good
listening".
At that, one and all settled back expectantly. Old Ned gave a few preparatory
'hawks' by way of clearing his throat and
settling in his mind how he should start off;
and began the story.
" Well", he said, "to give it a start-off, it
was like this, do you see. When John
Sullivan came back home here to Millington
after being a great help to President Lincoln
in winning the war and preserving the
Union he found it no easy matter to settle
down to what you might call ordinary
pursuits. Battle fatigue, they'd call it
nowadays in a scientific way; but in
Johnny's case it wasn't so much he was tired
of battling as that he had got so used to it
that he found workaday life very slow.
"As you well know, a very pious lad was
Johnny. And then again he had this fatigue
from not battling coursing through his
veins. So when of a night he'd pick up
The Boston Pilot and read about the scandalous
goings-on over in holy Rome where
the Italian men of the Orange lodges were
annoying and pestering the Holy Father
something awful, he used to be fit to be tied.
It used to get Johnny so riled up and boiling
mad that there was many a time-he often
told me later-that he had a good mind to
resign from the Holy Name Society
temporarily just to give vent to his feelings
and be able to gosh darn Garibaldi and his
Red Shirt Sassenachs as free and hearty as
he'd like.
"So, when he heard that up in Montreal,
P.Q., a bunch of noble-hearted, real fine
Catholic men had banded up and organized
a company of Papal Zouaves to go over and
give the Holy Father a hand, Johnny was all
for it. Wild horses couldn't have held him
here. He was off to Montreal, P.Q., in less
time than you could tell it, by stage coach
to Boston and by boat up the ocean as quick
as he could ever get there. H e was signed up
with them Zouaves, a very special kind of
soldier and more or less all officers, heroes
anyway, before you could get out the
‘Jack' in ‘Jack Robinson'. And when the
regiment finally sailed out from New York
harbour across the ocean wide and wild after
High Mass at Saint Peter's Church, Johnny
was right up there in the very bow of the
boat, geared for action, and advising the
captain on the best winds to take to get to
Rome the faster.
"Now that would be in January. Well,
sirs, by the middle of February there wasn't
a man, woman or child in and about holy
Rome but didn't know that a mighty hero
at last had taken up his post and guard on
the city's walls, so well did Johnny Sullivan
give an account of himself.
" Now John, for all he was a soldier
through and through, was never much of a
one for taking orders, unless from the very
highest-ups, like generals and such; and even
then Johnny would prefer it to be put to him
more like as a suggestion. So when the
colonel of the Zouaves, who was a great one
for military tactics out of the book but with
none of Johnny' s experience, told the men of
the regiment that Napoleon the Bonaparte
had asserted that every soldier carried a
marshal’s baton in his knapsack, Johnny
gave him the big ha-ha, but not out loud, of
course. It was just the sort of old guff you
might expect of a gom like Napoleon,
Johnny thought, who had been very nasty
to a Pope in his own day and what's more
had missed the chance of the world to help
Wolfe Tone free Ireland.
' Johnny felt that a knapsack was a very
poor place to be hiding the like of a baton,
a usable sort of a weapon that you might
well be getting a good lot of wear out of in
a handy sort of way. Besides he had had the
fore thought- there was never any flies on
Johnny-to bring along his own, a good
stout bit of ashplant that he had from his
father before him and that saw good use by
the father in '98; and more than that was
blessed for the father by Father Murphy of
Boolavogue.
"So out of his knapsack Jonny took that
baton and on the q.t., without more to do
and late of a night and his own comrades
sleeping, he'd shinny over the walls of holy
Rome and out to the camp of the Garibaldis
and apply that bit of ashplant where he felt
it would do the world of good. And I must
say, and no doubt the records would prove
it, that the casualities among them redshirted
Orangemen were higher on those
nights Johnny slipped over the wall than in
some of the big day battles with cannon and
shot and shell. For when John Sullivan had a
job of journey work to do, he did it well and
thorough. He put his heart and soul into it,
and there was never a bigger heart or soul
than was in that man's body.
"By the powers of war, the Garibaldis
must have been laying around the battlefield
like ninepins", chortled Larry from
Dublin.
"Like leaves in the Valley of Brosa,
Johnny used to put it that way", smiled
Ned. " 'Tis a place of very leafy trees and
high winds that place, Brosa", he explained.
"And what's more", he said and his voice
rose high and defiant, "from them little
excursions over the walls of holy Rome by
our John came a new idea in military tactics.
Now the lot of you well know you can't
pick up the paper after your tea but you
don't read about the 'standing army' of this
country or that one. Now I had the same
idea as you all had, until Johnny Sullivan
explained it to me, that a 'standing army'
would be one that stood still and stood fast,
like the Kerry militia, and being all Irish,
like George Washington's, never run; nor
ever had cause to call a shameful retreat a
proud evacuation. You know who I mean.
" I thought that. But not so. The military
term 'standing army' came into being only
and all on account of our own John Gabriel
Sullivan and his ashplant. He hit where it
hurt and was most shameful. Standing army,
inagh; after a few nights of John Sullivan
whirling through their camp, divil a man of
the whole Garibaldis was able to sit down.
They ate breakfast off the mantel, if you
know what I mean. They could do nothing
else but stand; and that's where the term
originated.
"Well to make a long story short,
February stretched on into March; and
before Johnny knew it if it wasn't Saint
Patrick's Day in the morning. He felt lost
and lonesome, Johnny did, very lost and
lonesome. The French Canadian boys in the
regiment could see how it stood with him;
and on the eve they gave their Irish hero a
great party. One of the lads, who was a
great fiddler, borrowed a violin from off
the Cardinal Stradivarius and made shift
with a few times like The Top of Cork Road
and The Shan Van Vocht; and Johnny taught
them all to sing in chorus Hail Glorious
Saint Patrick and The Wearing of the Green.
They even got a pair of bagpipes from down
Sicily way but Johnny told me that they
weren't what you might call modern, and
with the Italian cut to their jib the jigs and
reels that were played on them all come out
sounding like high opera. But anyhow, they
all had a very nice party, a real good time,
with the Garibaldis beyond the walls gnashing
their teeth and pulling at their moustaches
and muttering of how they'd just like
to lay their hands on Johnny Sullivan.
" Still and all, with the actual dawning of
The Day, Johnny felt very blue and peaked
in his soul. For there was nary a parade to
march in nor a banquet to speak at; and
what plagued his proud heart most, not a
bit of a sprig of the blessed shamrock could
he find to put in his hat and show his
colours; not in the whole, wide, vast city of
Rome could he find even a sprigeen -
although he went up one hill and down
another, seven in all, asking every flower
seller.
" He had the day off as a holiday, of
course; even the high generals knew that
John Sullivan wouldn't take it kindly if he
was asked to work on that day. But all the
same, it looked from the start of it as if it
would be a very dull day, indeed. So after
High Mass at Saint Peter's, but sadly missing
the kind of a concert of Irish music on the
organ we have here always back home, and
having half a mind to speak sharply to the
Pope's organist about it, he went off for a
lonely walk by himself
" He considered, after leaving Saint
Peter's, on dropping into the Vatican
rectory and wishing the Holy Father, 'Top
o' the morning' and the blessings of The
Day but decided against it. It so happened
that while by this time he knew High
Cardinals by the score, and they knew him,
Johnny had not the honour yet of meeting
and shaking hands with the Pope personally.
Pope Pius the Ninth that would be, that
come before Leo. For the day that Johnny
had dropped by to pay his respects to the
Holy Father, Pope Pius was out on a sick-call, and John was never sure that the curate
who answered the bell had got it straight
just who it was calling and given the Pope
the right message. And when the Supreme
Pontiff came to camp on a visit of state to
give the Zouaves his blessing, it was just
Johnny's luck to be out over the walls with
two Canadian chums of his, Ulric Labbe and
Godfrey de Tonnancour, giving the Garibaldi
s a little private work-out and particular
what-for.
"So the Pope and Johnny never having
been properly introduced, John thought it
might look a little bit pushing just to stop
by merely for the minute-as if he were
looking for a cup in the hand, as it were;
so he just tipped his hat as he passed the
Vatican rectory door and strolled on across
town for himself
" Now of course, of all places to go for a
walk in Rome on the Seventeenth of
March for a good Irishman and a Sullivan,
the only place fitting and proper was to the
Church of San Pietro di Montorio where the
great Earls are buried, Hugh O'Neill, the
Earl of Tyrone, and Hugh O'Donnell, the
Earl of Tyrconnell. Close friends they had
been of his own ancestor, the O'Sullivan
Bere, Earl of Bere and Bantry. So off there
he went to say his prayers there for the
souls of those very faithful departed. It was
in his noggin, too, that he might have the
luck to run into some other Irishmen there
who might be able to give him the lend of a
sprig of the dear little shamrock. Johnny
felt that lost without his.
"Wouldn't you think now they were
very slow in Ireland at that time not to be
sending so me shamrock over to holy
Rome?" interrupted Larry O'Toole. "They
might know that the Holy Father would be
upset on Saint Patrick's Day without his
little bit".
" Wisha, will you hold your whisht to
cool your porridge, and be listening to my
story", snapped Ned a bit peevishly, "Sure
what were the Garibaldis only Orangemen
under another name. Do you think for a
minute they'd let any shamrock get through
into holy Rome while they were camped
outside it walls? It's the one thing they'd be
bound not to let happen, if they had to
capture and kill the postman to do it.
" No matter. Let me get on with my story.
Well, to Johnny's bitter disappointment not
a single, solitary Irishman showed up at
Saint Pietro's church all day, although he
hung around saying his beads and the
Stations and making novenas until well-nigh dark. It seems, he found out later, that
what Cork and Clare and Kerry and Mayo
men there were in town at the time were all
over at the Irish College going great guns
at a smashing ceilidh.
" Now that was the one place - the Irish
College-that Johnny had given the go-by
to since he struck holy Rome. For the only
chance that John had at the schooling was a
few terms under 'Lather-' em Davis', the
master here in Millington long ago. So
he was a little bit backward about going to
a college, not being too well up on things
like quadratical algebra, as you might say,
and only having enough Latin and Greek
by him to hold an ordinary conversation
and pass the time of day. Not that any one
could ever say that John Gabriel Sullivan
wasn't highly educated ; for he was. He was.
He knew the 'Rademadaisy' and the
Catechism backwards, and he was not any
man's fool on Holy Scripture. But most of
what he had picked up he had gotten on his
own, do you see. So while he wouldn't
take second place from a Harvard man or an
Oxford man, him least of all, he was not at
all anxious to know the bite of shame before
educated men of his own race and blood.
"For he rightly figured, as he used
always to say, if an Irishman with no
education at all is five times as intelligent
and well-set in learning as anybody ever
could be, what in Heaven's name wouldn't
you be expecting front the like of a college-educated Irishman? No! Johnny Sullivan
knew his limitations. He wouldn't presume
to presume on men like that, all of them
studying to be bishops and canons. So he
left the Irish College alone those first
months, although it nearly killed him to do it.
" Well, to get on, he had just got up
front his knees at Saint Pietro's after one
last decade for the Fenian movement, and
was dipping his hand in the holy water font,
when off in a far, obscure corner of the
church he saw a little, old priest who must
have come in while Johnny was lost in his
devotions.
' Johnny placed him at once from his
white cassock and black cloak as one of the
Dominican Fathers; and up in M ontreal,
P.Q., John had gotten to know quite a few
in that holy order while he was waiting to
sail. He waited a bit out of pious courtesy
in the back of the church until he saw the
priest bless himself and make ready to go.
Then he went up to him in a friendly way
and gave the Father a 'God and Mary and
Saint Patrick to you' in the West Cork way,
and introduced himself very politely.
" Well, the priest, of course, had heard of
Johnny as everybody in Rome at that time
had, his noble exploits having got well
around and the whole town talking about
him. And, indeed, the priest was more than
glad to see him and have the chance to
shake his hand-a great thing to go back
and tell his curates. He asked Johnny if he
was walking his way and as it turned out
Johnny was. So they had more than a
pleasant walk in the evening shadows,
chatting together like old friends-they
took to each other so easy-and at the
priest's suggestion sticking to the back
streets- as Johnny figured, so as not to let
the cross traffic interrupt them. Johnny gave
the Father all the very latest news from the
battle front; and even told him confidentially
of the fun John was having on his own hook,
going out over the walls on night's with a
smugglers' moon, and giving the Garibaldis
the stand-up-army treatment.
" The priest shook his head at John
reproachfully for so disobeying orders; but
he had to smile about it at that- a quiet,
holy smile-the way Johnny put the story
over was so comical.
" They got so friendly and chummy that
when they reached the square of Saint
Peter' and the priest said he lived close by,
Johnny up and asked him if he wouldn't
like to stroll a little further. He' d like to
introduce the Father to Ulric and Godfrey
and some of the other lads at the camp. It
might be, said Johnny to him, that some of
the Montreal boys, knowing how real bad
John had felt in the morning about having
no shamrock, had been able to ferret out a
sprig or two. Ulric and Godfrey had left
camp right after reveille vowing to scour
Rome for a bit of the blessed green for
their comrade. If they had had any luck at
all, Johnny told the priest he would be glad
to share the joy of it and offer the Father
a spray of the plant of the Holy Trinity to
symbolize the day of their happy meeting.
"The little priest in white smiled- he had
the nicest smile, said Johnny, a holy, good
smile, a saintly smile, as it were, and said,
yes, he would be real pleased to walk on to
the camp of the Zouaves and meet Johnny's
friends. It was such a wonderful, inspiring
thing for them to leave their homes and
families in far-off lands and come so eagerly
and piously to Rome to aid the cause of
God's Holy Church.
"Well, as it happened, when they come
up to the outskirts of the camp, even before
they reached the sentries, there was Ulric
and Godfrey standing in the road, their
faces as long as Lent. Not a bitteen of the
shamrock had they been able to lay their
hands on, although the soles of their boots
were worn through to the stocking feet
stravaging about Rome. They had even
stopped by at the Irish College; but none
was there either, so complete a job had the
Orange Garibaldis done on Shawn the Post.
"They felt so low and down in the mouth
that they started in right away with
apologies to Johnny, before he could get a
chance at all to show his manners by making
proper introductions. And when he finally
could get a word in edgewise, for the
Canadians like all French are so familiar
with their language that they speak it very
fast, he had to turn to the little priest to ask
his name. They had gotten on so easy and
well Johnny had not thought to inquire
before.
"But before he could get the question out
of his mouth, who should come striding up
the boreen but the very highest general of
all the Zouaves in Rome.
' Johnny and Ulric and Godfrey sprang
to instant salute, of course. But their hands
dropped and their mouths gaped open wide
when the high general, for all he was known
throughout Europe as the world's own
stickler for military etiquette, not only gave
no salute back; but ignored them completely
!
"Instead, what did he do but plump right
down on his knees in the dust of the road,
his gold-lace hat thrown off in a flash, and
make the full of a double genuflexion before
the little priest, all the while mumbling
something over and over in the French
tongue.
" Ulric and Godfrey got what the high
general was saying right away-but
Johnny's French, although very serviceable,
mind, wasn't up to real fast talking. That
the big general was asking for a blessing he
could tell right enough, but the salutation
to the little priest in white quite escaped him.
He knew that the Dominicans were very
strong in Montreal, P.Q., and more than
that he didn't think. No matter, he knew
what was what as well as the next man if a
blessing was in it. So promptly down on his
knees he went, beating Godfrey and Ulric
by a good bit of a fraction of time.
"The little priest started to bless them all.
His old, white hand went up. Something
come to Johnny then. He said afterward he
had a feeling that be used to get with
President Lincoln. He felt he had to look
up to be sure it was the same little stocky
man standing there, not the tall, grey
gauntness of 'Old Abe'. Look up he did;
and then, seeing the holiness shining in the
Father's face-all of a sudden, Johnny
Sullivan knew !
"He didn't let on. He couldn't let on - he
was so shaken with unbelief in it all. It
couldn't be-yet he knew in his soul it was !
He made the Sign of the Cross with the
others; but be rose to his feet a shaken man.
So white and shaken that all he could blurt
out was-could he be excused for a minute.
"The high general looked daggers at him,
and Ulric and Godfrey were dismayed. But
his friend, the little priest with the sad eyes
like Mr. Lincoln, only looked worried
whether or not the long walk had tired John
and him not eating all day.
"It was the Father and not the high
general waved John off; for Johnny was
still confused and looking to the general for
steadying. But wave him off the little priest
"And in his outstretched palms ... was as fine a clump of the blessed shamrock ... "
did, with a signal to the general and the two
Zouaves to follow John and watch over
him if it was a spell he felt coming on or
what.
"Little chance of them doing that. Before
the three soldiers could as much as turn
around, Johnny was gone, out of sight,
running like a deer or a fine, fast horse on
the Curragh. And the dust fron1 his heels
had hardly time to settle after his going
before it was rising again from his coming
back! He was back again almost before you
got used to his going.
"And in his outstretched palms as he
kneeled again before the Vicar of Christ on
earth, our Holy Father Pope Pius the Ninth,
was as fine a clump of the blessed shamrock
as ever grew in the four green fields of holy
Ireland!"
After a silence, "Did he have it in his tent
all the time and forget about it?" asked
Frank Cahill wonderingly.
"A-a-ah. What's the matter with you,
John Francis?" snorted Ned. "Indeed, he
did not ! What he did was this ! Like a
flash of the lightning he was through the
camp and over the walls like a greyhound
coursing on the mountain. Battling his way
he was, through the Red Shirts right up to
the headquarters' tent in less than the time
I'm taking to tell it. Before the frightened
eyes of old Garibaldi, himself, no less, he
grabbed the blessed shamrock right off the
traitor's desk, where he had just stolen it out
of a letter sent from the poet, Thomas Davis,
to a friend of his, an Italian Capuchin he
knew of old through Father Mathew. Yes,
and fighting back through the enemy lines
-ten thousand red-shirted Orangemen
blazing away at him-and over the wall
again was Johnny Sullivan; the whole thing
not taking more than five minutes by the
clock and him not a bit hurted only a little
out of breath.
" 'Twas little enough, and the least he
could do, our John, to show the love of
the Irish for the Holy Father and for God's
Church than to get the Pope of Rome - who
in his own day Saint Patrick was proud
to love and honour-a bit of the holy
shamrock that gives token before the world
of our Holy Faith and the living proof of
the Holy Trinity".
"Still and all", said Larry, after Ned had
sat back with a lovely gleam of piety in his
eye, "I could never understand it how them
foreigners and black heretics made such
headway later and finally took Rome away
from the Holy Father. I mean with the likes
of John Sullivan, his own friend, backing
him up. It never seem understandable to
me", said Larry thoughtfully.
"The Holy Father was all but a saint,
that's why'', admonished Old Ned sternly.
"Ain't the Pope always the Vicar of the
Prince of Peace? Pope Pius the Ninth called
off the war later on because he didn't like to
see even his enemies hurted. And more by
the same token, a good part of his reason
was this: he didn't want the sin of fighting
to be too black on his friend Johnny
Sullivan's soul-in case Johnny should get
real mad and let his Irish get the best of him.
Indeed, he told Johnny that time that
although he cherished the shamrock more
than gold and frankincense and myrrh,
highly priceless as they are, he didn't quite
like the idea of an Irishman fighting on
Saint Patrick's Day".
"True for him", said Larry O'Toole.
"The day for that is the Twelfth of July.
Wasn't he smart now, the Pope, to know
that: Not'', said Larry quickly, "that it's
ever by our own starting or doing. But
you can't help a man just being there, by
the powers of war!"

