" Little Rome", parva Roma, as the inhabitants of Waterford called their
city, shares in the glory of its greatest
son who lies buried in the heart of immortal
Rome. It kept a nice balance between
culture and commerce when Luke Wadding
was born there in 1588 to a rich merchant.
The Waddings of Waterford were the most
brilliant family in Ireland in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries. Luke's brother,
Ambrose, became a Professor of Physics at
Dottingen, while his cousin, Father Paul
Sherlog, SJ, was made Rector of the Irish
Colleges of Salamanca and Santiago.
Another cousin, Father Peter Wadding,
SJ, became Chancellor of the University of
Prague; his namesake, Father Luke Wadding,
S.J., was Consultor of the Holy Office in
Spain, and yet another Jesuit of the family,
Father Michael Wadding, SJ, was Rector
of the Colleges of Guatamala and Pueblo de
los Angelos. The scattering of Irish scholars
through the world was as the scattering of
sparks from an unquenchable fire. In the
case of the Waddings of Waterford the
sparks were exceptionally brilliant, and the
brightest among them was the great
Franciscan, ambassador, annalist, scholar
and patriot, Father Luke. In a far from
frivolous sense he was "a bright spark".
Luke Wadding was born at one of those
periods of history like our own, when the
forces of evil seem to be highly organized
and equipped, and the forces of good, for a
while at least, seem to lose nerve. It was a
time of troubles, an era of disintegration.
The Reformation was rending the splendid
fabric of Christian culture, and the storm
which tore the Spanish Armada to pieces in
the year of Luke's birth seemed symbolic of
the tempest of hatred and bestial ferocities
then loosed on the world.
In Ireland the tyranny of the Tudors
gathered such momentum that, west of
Waterford, the vast and fertile plain of
Munster was to be made as desolate as
Poland after the Prussians had passed over
it. "The lowing of a cow or the voice of a
ploughman was not heard from. Dingle to
the Rock of Cashel", wrote the annalist.
With desecration and death was the land
made desolate.
One beneficial effect of the Tudor tyranny
was the binding together of the Irish in a
fresh unity of spirit. The " mere Irish" and
the descendants of the early colonists who
had become " more Irish than the Irish themselves",
were drawn together in the bond of
Faith when the Tudors added religious persecution
to their domination. The Waddings,
who had come with the colonists centuries
before, had remained loyal to the English
Crown, but now the persecution of their
Faith made it imperative to choose the
better part.
The Tudor persecution sent Irish scholars
wandering. Ten centuries before, Irish
scholars had travelled through Europe
to bring knowledge and the Christian way
of life to a benighted Continent encumbered
with the debris of a crumbled Empire.
But now they went seeking knowledge in
the great Universities of Louvain, Salamanca,
Coimbra, Rome, Paris, Prague,
Cologne and Lisbon. It was to Lisbon that
Luke Wadding went with his elder brother,
Matthew, to enter the Irish College there.
After six months' study he entered the
Franciscan novitiate at Matozinhos, near
Oporto, accompanied by a friend, Richard
Synott, who was later murdered by the
Cromwellians. He studied philosophy and
theology at Leyria, Lisbon and Coimbra,
and was ordained priest in 1613, six years
after the flight of the Earls.
The Wadding family had been intimate
with the Franciscans in Waterford for
generations. We may presume that they
co-operated with the Franciscans in their
opposition to the legislative measures taken
by the English government in Ireland to
introduce racial discrimination in religious
affairs. It was enacted as early as 1310 that
"no Irishman shall be received into a
Religious Order among the English" in the
conquered parts of Ireland. The Franciscans
had always been on the side of the oppressed
and underprivileged, and when they came to
Ireland very shortly after the death of their
founder, they were welcomed for this, and
many other reasons. There is much truth
in the Irish saying that "The Irish were
Franciscans before Saint Francis". The lives
of the early Irish saints are perfectly in tune
with the spirit of the Fioretti, since Celtic
spirituality, such as we find in the writings
of Saint Columba and the poems of Saint
Columbanus, looked on God and nature
and human destiny with seraphic joyfulness
and wonder.
The ruins of the great Franciscan abbeys
scattered throughout the country are eloquent
reminders of the part played by the
Seraphic Order in Irish history. We know
how closely the Franciscans were associated
with the struggles for Irish freedom from the
days of the Tudors to those of the black-and-
tans. The Cromwellians who " taught
their hounds alike to run upon the scent of
wolf and Friar" had a keen appreciation of
the Friar's position and power among the
people. We may also presume that Luke
Wadding chose the Franciscan Order with
deliberation. He proposed to devote himself
to Ireland in accordance with the glorious
motto of the Irish Franciscans, Do chum
glóire Dé agus onóra na h-Éireann, and he
well judged that in the Seraphic ranks he
could best fulfil that secondary vocation of
his life.
Scarcely had he begun his scholastic
career when Luke Wadding showed the
temper of his mind. He studied under the
great Jesuit theologian, Suarez, at Coimbra,
and participated in his refutation of the
theory of the Divine Right of Kings-a
theory dearly cherished by James I of
England, who was so perturbed by these
discussions of the theologians that he made
formal complaint to the Spanish king. Such
was Luke Wadding's intellectual brilliance
at his studies that he was appointed professor
of theology at the Franciscan College of
Leon after his ordination. Later, at the age of
twenty-seven, he was appointed professor
at his alma mater, Salamanca.
As the great Franciscan advanced in
wisdom and knowledge, his saintly character
began to reveal itself with compelling
splendour. It was a character such as we see
still clearly revealed in the portrait attributed
to Ribera (Lo Spagnoletto), which hangs
in the National Gallery. It is strong, almost
stern. The eyes are weary but watchful,
seeming to gaze far off from the tranquil
citadels of Rome to his own sad nation.
But the mouth is tender. It is a mouth used
to prayer and courteous speech. And indeed
he was eminently Franciscan in his unfailing
courtesies, which, in turn, won him
many friends, not only among the poor of
Rome, but among princes, cardinals and
popes.
His first distinguished friend was Antonio
a Trejo, Archbishop of Cartagena. He was
appointed by King Philip III of Spain to
lead a Royal Commission to Rome, and
he chose Father Luke as theologian to the
Commission which was to promote the
doctrine of the Immaculate Conception,
always dear to the hearts of the Irish and
Franciscans alike. The Spanish Royal Commission
was presented to Pope Paul V in the
middle of December, 1618. The Commission
returned to Spain after eighteen
months, but Father Luke remained as
accredited theological adviser on the doctrine,
on which he wrote a clear and
impartial account. He stayed with the
Spanish friars in San Pietro in Montorio,
which is still a place of pilgrimage for all
Irish visitors in Rome, for there the Irish
princes, O'Neill and O'Donnell, lie m
front of the high altar :
"Sad from their Ulster hills they came,
Dank with hope's slow blight,
Until they lay where Peter's fame
Built soaring domes of light:
Under this worn and trodden name
Ended all fear and flight".
His genius for friendship flowered abundantly
within the Eternal City, and made it
possible for him to achieve those almost
startling feats of physical and intellectual
labour. He was cordially received by the
leading families of Rome who quickly discerned
the aristocratic bearing and dignity
of the slightly built Friar. The Princes
Barberini and Ludovisi became and remained
his close friends, and helped him to
found the illustrious College of San Isidoro.
Pope Paul V, who instantly recognised his
worth, appointed him Consultor to the
Holy Office. The Pope's nephew, Cardinal
Scipio Borghese, became his close friend, as
did the nephews of the succeeding Pope,
Urban VIII. During his thirty years' sojourn
in Rome Father Luke enjoyed the intimate
friendship and confidence of five Popes - Paul
V, Gregory XV, Urban VIII, Innocent
X and Alexander VIL
It was Father Luke's friendship with the
leading families that made it possible for him
to finance military aid to Ireland and to
acquire the site of San Isidoro. In this latter
undertaking he was also helped by the
general of the Franciscan Order, Father
Benignus. So attached did Father Benignus
become to the Irish Friar that he came to
spend the close of his life with him. It was
he, too, who helped to gather the immense
amount of material necessary for the composition
of the Annals of the Franciscan
Order. On a site once occupied by the
infamous gardens of Lucullus, whose banquets
are still proverbially synonymous with
licentious extravagance, a company of
Spanish Franciscans had built a little friary
and college, dedicated to their Saint,
Isidoro. It was a happy irony of history that
these holy men should come to spend their
days in the plain living and high thinking,
in Franciscan poverty and joy of spirit on
the spot which had witnessed so many
pagan debaucheries. The friary was acquired
for Father Luke for the training of
Irish Franciscan priests, and has so remained
for the past three centuries, with a slight
break in the period of the Napoleonic Wars.
It was this break which accounts for the
curious name of the little street in which it is
situated-via degli artisti-"the street of the
artists".
When the French army invaded Rome
during the Napoleonic invasions, the Irish
friars were compelled to evacuate San
Isidoro. The college and church remained
vacant until it was acquired by a group of
German artists calling themselves Pre-Raphaelites,
but called by the local people
"the Nazarenes"-because of their long hair
and other-worldly look. This group of
painters, many of whom later became
Catholics, devoted themselves to art with
high enthusiasm, and lived a life of quasi-religious
fervour, with a regular horarium.
The leader of the group, Overbeck, later
painted a picture of the death of Saint
Francis at the Portiuncula, Assisi. San
Isidoro is a beautiful casket of precious gems
of art and architecture, for many famous
artists, including Carlo Maratti and Andrea
Sacchi, have contributed to its beauty.
What impresses the visitor to San
Isidoro most is the juxtaposition of the
statues of Saints Patrick and Isidore, and the
plaque in the portico bearing the admonition
of our National Apostle, which
has become a dictum of the Irish Church:
"Any difficulties arising in this island should
be brought to the Apostolic See: as you
would be Christians you must be children
of Rome". It was through the influence of
Father Luke that the Feast of Saint Patrick
was extended to the Universal Church. As
early as 1390, by the General Chapter of
Assisi, the Feast was extended to the whole
Franciscan Order, and, as Father Luke
observed (Annal. Min. ix. 96), no such signal
honour had been bestowed on the illustrious
apostles of other nations or the patrons of
Franciscan provinces.
From the moment that the Confederation
of Kilkenny appointed Luke Wadding as its
agent and first Ambassador of the Irish
Provisional Government, he threw his
inexhaustible energies into the cause of the
Confederation. He persuaded Pope Urban
VIII to send Father Scarampi to Ireland as His
envoy, and when he arrived in 1643 he
brought with him 30,000 Roman crowns
which the Roman nobility had given the
great Friar for a great cause. The Pontiffs
themselves gave practical aid to our nation
at the behest of Father Luke, who advised
Pope Innocent X to send Archbishop
Rinuccini here as Apostolic Nuncio. This
time Father Luke had collected some 26,000
scudi as well as 2,000 muskets, 4,000
swords, 2,000 pike-heads, 4,000 pairs of
pistols, 20,000 pounds of gunpowder and a
copious supply of shot. It was this practical
aid which helped to make the Battle of
Benburb such a splendid victory in the year
following the Nuncio's arrival. Among
Father Luke's many friends and correspondents
was Owen Roe O'Neill.
It might be thought that Father Luke's
preoccupation with practical affairs would
leave him no time for scholarly pursuits and
sacerdotal duties. Yet, he was not only a
model priest and a most popular confessor,
but he was a well-beloved superior of his
college. The students loved him for the same
reason as his penitents, for his unfailing
courtesy, his willingness to listen and give
counsel to even the most troublesome or
tedious. Besides all this, his literary output
was monumental in size and significance.
His classical history of the Franciscan Order,
Annales Ordinis Minorum, was published
between 1625 and 1654, bringing its history
down from earliest times to 1540. It is
regarded as one of the finest works of its
kind in the world. In this opus magnum,
as in his work on Franciscan writers - Scriptores
Ordinis Minorum -he has gathered
into permanent form the whole Franciscan
tradition to the great enrichment of European
culture. He published, besides, a sixteen-volume
edition of the works of Duns
Scotus, at Lyons in 1639. Earlier he published
the Writings of Saint Francis, at Antwerp,
and collected five thousand volumes for the
College of San Isidoro.
As a further sample of Father Luke's
versatility we may mention that he established
a printing press in Hebrew type, and
published thereon an essay on the language.
He edited the Hebrew Concordance and a
Hebrew Grammar and Dictionary of Marius
a Calasio, a notable contribution to Hebrew
scholarship. He also edited the little classic
of an unknown Franciscan, the Promptuarium
Morale.
It will be asked very naturally how even
that indefatigable Friar wrote so much.
"Only in the course of night was it possible
to carry on literary work", he, himself,
explained in a preface, "the whole day being
consumed with tedious cares-die universo
per molestas curas distracto". Francis Harold,
his nephew and biographer, records that he
used sit at his desk till the late hours of the
night till weariness overcame him, and he
found it necessary to roll himself against the
walls of his cell to restore circulation and
feeling to his exhausted body. It is not surprising
to learn that he suffered from a
perpetual headache.
One of the many amazing things about
Father Luke was his seeming care for everyone,
collectively and individually. He had
that exquisite courtesy, common to the
Franciscan and aristocrat of mind alike, that
he seemed to give all his attention to
whoever sought it. Not content with
looking after the welfare of the members of
his own Order, he founded the Ludovisian
College, now the famed Irish College, in
Rome, for the education of Irish secular
priests. This, too, was achieved through the
benevolence of an illustrious friend - Cardinal Ludovico Ludovisi. Besides this
he founded a novitiate in the old-world
town of Capranica, thirty miles north of
Rome, for the use of young Irish exiles who
felt a call to the Seraphic way of life.
There was one even yet more remarkable
fact about this great Franciscan: though he
spent over fifty years out of his beloved
country, he never returned even for a brief
rest. He could easily have done so, for he had
facilitated hundreds of other Irish exiles in
their return. He could even more easily
have paid a visit to Louvain, for the friars
were passing to and fro between Rome and
the Belgian Athens in those days when the
Irish Franciscan College of Louvain housed
the zealous Ward, Colgan, Fleming and the
mighty annalist, Michael O'Clery. At
Prague, too, there were Irish Friars who
would have gladly received him. But
Father Luke preferred to consume himself
in unremitting toil, without rest or relief
During his two score years in Rome he
visited on literary business, Assisi and a few
Perugian towns. Beyond these and a visit
to Naples, he appears never to have left the
Eternal City, from where he directed the
affairs of his Order and nation.
Luke Wadding was above all else a great
Franciscan, which is to say he was an
extremely humble man. The Supreme
Council of the Confederation of Kilkenny
sent letters to Popes Urban VIII and
Innocent X requesting that he be made a
cardinal. But as its agent these letters had to
pass through his own hands. In actual
fact they never passed through, but were discovered
after his death in November, 1657.
In the beginning of his crowded career
Luke Wadding seemed, as we said, like a
bright spark, outshining so many others
driven before the tempest of hate. Today he
appears as a star, outshining all others in a
constellation of illustrious names. We can
pay him no greater tribute, perhaps he
would have asked for none greater, than
that set down with dry precision in no less
a work than the English Dictionary of
National Biography " The spirit of patriotism
originated by Wadding has ever
since been retained".
