The parish of Prior covers the extreme,
seabeaten tip of the peninsula which
rears its mountainous spine between
Dingle Bay and Kenmare River. It is a
sombre place of brown, brooding quietude,
the heath-brown hills running down to bog-brown
valley floors with only a narrow
ribbon of chequered green on the skirts of
the hills for men to live on. Overhead the
grey of low clouds and all around the steel-grey
of level and limitless sea. Empty roads,
empty fields, silent, white houses standing
apart in the lacework fields, no human
voices on the air and no motion but the
slow drift of black cattle on the hills and
the smooth glide of gulls conning the rim
of the sea for offal. Of the people there was
no sight, except when one of them moved
across the white front of a house from byre
to stall. Their neutral clothing disappeared
in the grey-green of the fields.
Their aspect is in keeping with their
sombre setting. Tall and goodlooking in an
austere way, they are thin almost to emaciation.
The men speak Irish by preference;
the women, with feminine realism, favour
English for their children's sake. But in Irish
or English, their conversation is always
lively and shot through with acid humour,
their mental attitude to life being both
disillusioned and unexpectant.
The place and its people cast a shade of
compassionate sadness on all who come to
Prior seeking contact with its immemorial
past. Its very name shows that it was the
centre of great religious activity in the
centuries immediately following the coming
of Saint Patrick. The district teemed with
people eager to serve the physical needs of
the self-denying hermits who lived and
praised the Lord on the dizzy pinnacle of the
Skellig Rock, which, of itself, could not feed
a goat. Only the mediterranean climate of
those days made it possible for the ardent
Christians ashore to cross the eight miles of
ocean in their curraghs, laden deep with
food and water for a large community - and
do it every day for four hundred years.
When the ravaging Danes found them
out and plundered them time and again,
Abbot Blathmhac and the monks retired
to the mainland and built close by the sea
the nucleus of An Mhainistir exactly one
thousand years ago. It was a place of
sheltered quiet and the Abbey grew into a
noble assembly of cloisters, refectories and
dormitories within the walls and gardens
and pleasant policies without. Saint Michael
the Archangel was still their patron, as he
had been on the Skelligs.
The 29th of September was their great
day of pealing bells and Missae Cantatae,
followed by the ceremonial blessing of the
land, the sea and the people, who worked
thereon for God, Mother Church and her
ministers, lay and cleric. Then followed a
monster feast of oaten bread, hot from the
convent ovens, boiled salmon from the
sound and brimming mugs of milk, drawn
at dawn from the Priory cows. The games,
played on the faithche in the presence of the
Prior and his council, lasted until the
westering sun threw the shadow of Cnoc
Dhaill Sceithe over the green. Then vespers
were sung in the open and the great day
was done.
The Monastery enjoyed six hundred
years of sequestered calm, disturbed only by
the intermittent squabbles of the O'Sheas
with the O'Sullivans or the McCarthys.
Then came the deluge which engulfed them
all, lay and cleric alike. It came in two
waves. The first, a surge of Elizabethan
adventurers, greedy for the fat land of the
outlawed monasteries; the second, a tidal
bore of Cromwellian Puritans, sated with
the blood of Papists at home and in Ireland.
The Elizabethans had been born Papists
and remained Papists at heart, while they
seized the chance the Reformation gave
them of feathering their nests. Their
usurpation was, at worst, but a change of
masters for the common folk and a confusion
of tongues. For the clerics, alas, it
meant utter extinction. The second wave
was catastrophic. Poisoned by religious
hatred, it swept over the land, throwing it
open to a soldiery, licensed to put to the
sword the patrician and peasant, who was
tainted with either Royalty or Rome. The
Puritans had no background. They were a
ranting rabble scrambling for loot. Farriers,
musketeers and camp-followers found
themselves in possession of parcels of inaccessible
land, among the hostile uncooperative
people they had despoiled. Some
sold their useless acres to shrewder mates for
a stoup of ale on the nail. Others went
home and peddled their grants among the
guilds, which had sprung into corporate
being to grab from afar the fair lands of a
broken people. The Master Tailors of
Cheapside got their slice, the Worshipful
Liverymen of Lambeth got another and
the Corporate Coopers of Tottenham
scooped in the rest.
Prior fell into the possession of a group of
Bristol merchants, who fell out among
themselves and tore the ancient benefice
asunder. Each took to himself a negotiable
parcel and re-sold it, sight unseen, to the
highest bidder. The hitherto unknown
Sigersens and Butlers, who had remained on
the spot, picked up the fragments and consolidated
them into sizable properties on
which they proceeded to establish themselves
as landed gentry, with a rent-roll
they fixed at their own sweet will.
All this hurly-burly drove the native
people in upon themselves for spiritual
comfort. Of physical comfort they had
none. Cut off from their rapacious masters
by race, religion and language, they
huddled together in a broken world and
turned to the plenitude of their ancient past
to re-assure themselves that they really had
once been a proud and dominant race.
Strange as it appears to us, who have
learned to magnify the O'Neills and the
O'Donnells for withstanding the invaders
of those terrible times, the masterless people
of Prior threw their minds back, past them
and past their more familiar O'Briens,
O'Sheas and McCarthys, into the remoter
ages of the Fianna and the Red Branch
Knights for material to feed their racial
pride.
The people of Prior still lived, as their
fathers had lived, in family groups within
the circular raths, lioses and duns, which
survive them. and their pastoral way of life.
Their frail houses of wickered twigs have
melted away; they were never built to last
more than a season or two. A hundred years
had to pass before they dared or were permitted
to build themselves houses of stone
and thatch in the open. Even these they
built close together and, when night fell,
they drew around the turf fires to hear the
tales which told of a glorious past and
promised a more glorious future.
There was no shortage of shanachies.
They are a race of storytellers. Nor of epic
tales to tell. There are tales of Love and
Hate, Voyages and Pursuits, Battles of a
Thousand Men and Combats between
Incomparable Heroes, who fought to a
meticulously chivalrous code. It mattered
not that a tale was told a hundred times and
that it never deviated in word or phrase in
any telling, it was listened to with the
deepest interest. The slave never tires of his
former grandeur. Even for an hour, he is
again one of that gallant company, that
threw the might of pagan Rome back into
the sea at the Battle of Ventry Harbour.
He rides with Dathi to the foot of the Alps
and brings home a string of slaves to do his
bidding and forgets, for the moment, that
he himself is a slave to a brood of upstarts.
He sails with Maelduin on sunlit seas and
with Diarmuid into the icy waters of
Lochlann and always comes home with
gold and silver and lovely maidens, the
wage of his bright blade and strong right
arm. Resurgam he cried in his deepest heart
when the shanachie sounded the Dord of
the Fianna in battle and passed that cry for
freedom to his children and his children's
children until at last it was won. The spirit
of man is unconquerable.
The shanachies of Prior were carrying on
their devoted work down to the beginning
of this century. A half-dozen of them survived
to see the Rising and prosper in the
earliest flush of the victory they and their
kind had made possible for the generation
which won it. I was fortunate enough to
know them and gather some of their tales.
But Séamas Ó Duilearga, a blood brother of
theirs from the distant glens of Antrim, had
reached them before me. He saw the shade
of extinction in their eyes and devoted his
youth to living among them and writing
down the tales that would die with them,
because the need for telling them seemed to
be past. Séamas lived with them, learned
their language and sat at their knees,
absorbing their inmost thought and feeling,
their reverence for the past and their hopes
for the future. He is now sole heir to the
treasures they entrusted to him. As they
would say, he is 'Oisín tréis na Féinne'.
Sean Dhónuil Ó Conaill was, by common
assent, the last King of the Shanachies of
Prior. Seán Chormaic Ó Shéa was his
premier, Mihaul Conraoi his personal
attendant, Peats Ó Cealla his bard, and
Tomas Ó Cróinín the thorn in his flesh,
who sought to tarnish his crown with
venomous wit flung from afar. Tomas lived
alone and apart from the others in his midget
bothán beside the road at Dungegan, a
small, podgy manikin, with a roving eye
and a wonderful memory for salacious tales
of the great houses, which he told with
vicarious enjoyment.
Seán Dhónuil was a great man in every
way. In his old age he stood as straight as a
pine tree and as hard of limb. He held his
head high in any company, the large-boned
head of an ascetic, lit up by a pair of steady,
untroubled eyes. Although he was as poor
in worldly goods as a bird in a bush, he
was rich beyond measure in worldly wisdom
and in the lore of his race. Unlettered and
unable to speak any language but Gaelic,
his mind ranged wide over the problems of
life which vex mankind. He set apart as
dross those which are not soluble on this
side of the grave and reached, in his sure,
but unhurried way, a sound working
arrangement for those which are.
He lived in Kilrelig. That simple phrase
loses all significance in regard to Seán and
his location. In fact, it deceives. Conjure up
in your mind the picture of a bleak, mighty
mountain, the last of the serried range which
runs far out into the Atlantic from the heart
of Kerry. Picture to yourself the seaward
haunch of that windswept mountain, sloping
steeply from its thousand foot summit to the
sheer cliffs the sea has cut from its feet, all
clothed in a coat of brown heather. And
imagine that you see a narrow shelf cut by
feeble hands along the whole hem of the
heather, at a safe distance from the clifftops
for men and beasts to walk on. That is
the road to Kilrelig.
Midway on that dizzy road scoop out
from the towering mountain-side a niche,
fifty feet long and fifteen deep. Build in
that niche a row of tiny houses, with their
gables to the sea, like cattle with their
run1ps to the storm, and call it Kilrelig.
There, like a gannet on its airy ledge, Sean
Dhónuil lived his long, unworried, unrewarded
life, with Cáit, his thrifty, cleanly,
lovable wife, and reared a large family on
what he wrung from the hill and the sea in
the hard way shared by him and his
neighbours.
When the day's work was done and the
simple supper eaten, Cáit used sweep the
kitchen clean, get the fire going and light
the paraffin lamp over Seán's chair in the
ingle. Sean stood in the dark at the gable,
listening for the steps of the neighbours
coming to the nightly scoruidheacht, ready to
welcome them in his naturally grand
manner. The air was full of the intermittent
boom of the foghorn from the Bull Rock
twenty miles to the south'ard, and the
darkness pierced at ten-second intervals by
the flash of the Skellig Lighthouse. From
the base of the cliff, two hundred feet below,
came the surly growl of the sea as it gnawed
at the stubborn rocks. An eerie, intimidating
overture to an old man's tale!
The neighbours came in pairs, all middle-aged,
for there were few young people in
the village and those that were young had
no interest in the past. Their eyes were on
the future they were to spend in England,
drawing fabulous wages for 'slow-down'
war work. Séamas Ó Duilearga and I
arrived with the last pair, after trudging
the four uphill miles from Kinnard and
finding our way along the narrow road
with a bicycle lamp.
"An tú san, a Shéamais?" Sean asked
through the dark.
" 'Smé, cheana, a Sheáin, is tá do sheana-chara,
Seosamh, im theannta 'en turas so".
It was all in Irish, for Sean knew no
English. But he knew the duties of a host
and led us into the little house without
losing any of his dignity as he stooped low
in the five-foot doorway. Cáit shepherded
me to a stool near Sean's chair and Séamas
to his place under the lamp at the head of the
table, where he wrote the precious tales into
his folio notebook. Mihaul Bawn Conraoi
sat between Peats Ó Cealla and Seán
Ó Harta on a form in front of the fire. The
others sat on blocks of wreck-wood in the
shadows behind us and waited for Seán to
sit down, clear his throat and begin. I had
heard from Séamas that they were midway
in one of the major tales which took two
nights to tell at dictation speed; The Guileful
Blánait (Blánait na Ceilge).
Séamas had told me how far the tale had
gone at the previous session and had shown
me, with the light of the bicycle lamp, the
last sentence he had written into the notebook.
"Sean will begin with those very
words tonight, to link up the story, and will
carry on in the same words and sequences
that were used the first time he himself
heard them, fifty years ago".
I knew already how immutable were the
form and substance of the ancient tales, but
I noted the sentence Séamas showed me,
"Na leig do rún le mnaoi, dá áilleacht í"
which is "Give not your mind to maid,
though fair she be", just to make sure.
And sure enough, when Sean saw that we
were all seated and that Séamas was waiting,
pen in hand to begin, he took off his cap,
lowered his eyes, though the massive head
was still high against the wall and tuned his
voice to the oracular tones of the shanachies.
"Give not your mind to maid, though
fair she be", he said. "Blánait sat at the feet
of Curaoi and fed him with fair words and
strong mead and watched his eyes for signs
of the slumber she knew would come in
them. For she had mixed with the mead the
juice of the cupogue and the sap of the root
of the yew tree, which bring sleep to the
strong and death to the weak. She spoke
words of love to him till the strings of his
tongue grew loose and the lids of his eyes
fell down with the weight of the sleep that
was in them. His mighty head fell backwards
on the pillow she had placed on the
couch to receive it. His limbs hung nerveless
to the ground and he snored aloud. He was
at her mercy and she laughed aloud.
" She went to the door and called down
through the darkness to Cuchullain, to her
new lover, who waited below for a sign
that Curaoi was helpless and ready for the
sword. But the wind swept her call up to
the higher peaks where it was lost. When
her exultation died down, she remembered
the signal they had already arranged between
them. To whiten the waters of the torrent
which flowed from. the Cahir of Curaoi
down to Cuchulainn' s bothy at the foot of
the hill. To whiten them with the milk of
Curaoi’s cows, and then redden them with
Curaoi's blood".
Seán moved through the tragic tale
without a single gesture, even when
Cuchulainn lopped off Curaoi's head with a
mighty sweep of his sword. The homeric
vigour of his voice needed no visible act to
point the horror of the scene. We, who
listened, saw each step that Blánait took to
prepare her man for the slaughter. Saw her
tear Curaoi's tunic to strips to tie his wrists
together beneath the couch and tie his feet,
which hung helpless on each side. We saw
the heartless woman wind the last strip
about his neck and watched her cast about
for something to complete his bondage-to
put on him Ceangal na gCúig gCaol.
We saw her reject the idea of tearing the
splendid raiment she had put on to ravish
her new lover, to make a bond to tie up the
old one. Instead, she took a lock of her own
golden hair, which fell like a mantle to her
feet and cut it off with Curaoi's dagger.
Twisting the lock into a rope, and running it
through the bonds at his wrists, ankles and
neck, she drew them together and completed
the Inescapable Truss.
After the fell deed was done the Seanachie
pursued her in flight down the hill with
Cuchulainn and across the plains of Eireann
to his native Ulster. He told us of Feirceirtne,
Curaoi's friend, following close behind,
with vengeance in his heart, and then, by a
studied increase in the rate and rhythm of
the narrative, he drew us inexorably on to
the Ulster cliff-top to see Feirceirtne steal
upon the traitress and leap with her in his
arms to destruction on the rocks below.
For me that was a memorable experience.
Even for those, who had heard the tale
again and again and could recite it themselves
without dropping a word, the recital
was a display of the ancient art of the
shanachie at its rarest and best. It proved too
much for Séamas to listen to the engrossing
story and, at the same time, write it down
in cold script. Long before Seán had reached
the inevitable end, the scribe had closed his
book and delivered himself to the free and
delectable enjoyment of the tale and the
telling. Tomorrow was another, day. He
would come again.
Indeed, Séamas went up that narrow road
to Kilrelig night after night for many years,
whether the sunset turned the water to
blood and the heather to gold in summer or
the sea mist swallowed the mountain and
sea into its opaque immensity. He trod the
tenuous, rocky road so often that the gulls
and the gannets got to know him and dip
their wings in passing. Until at last he had
emptied Sean Dhónuil's storehouse of its
treasure and made it safe from. the incidence
of death, decay and neglect, Séamas lived
the remote, dedicated life of a hermit. Sean
wept when the task was done and Séamas,
whom he came to love as a son, shook
his hand for the last time at the seaward
gable of the house on the dizzy slope of
Kilrelig. As God made them He matched
them and brought them together from the
extreme corners of Éireann. Beannacht dilis
Dé le h-anamain Sheáin Dhónuil agus gura
fada 'nár measg againn Séamas, chun oideas
ár sean do chur ó bhaol dearmhaid in aigne
na nGael.
The parish of Prior is changing with the
changing times, and its people are changing
with it. They still live hard, for the hills and
the bogs and the sea are grudging, penurious
masters. But they eat better, dress better and
are better housed than their fathers. They
are yielding to the pressures from outside.
They are discarding the language of the
shanachies for the language of the newsprint,
the radio and the merchant. They have no
ear for the past and no care for the monuments
their forebears built in the heyday
of the Gael. Their eyes are set on the
horizon, beyond which they see the flesh
pots and soft living, for which the world has
turned itself into an inferno of competing
anthills.
Who are we, who also live soft, to show
them the better way?
