There are two classes, and only two
classes, of Anthology: Your Kind and
My Kind. It is surprising that even in a
limited field, such as Anglo-Irish verse, the
selections seem to be mutually exclusive.
They seem to be, for, inevitably, Your
comment upon My Kind is, "Now, why
couldn't he have ... ?" ; while My comment
upon Your Kind is "Now, why
couldn't he (she) have ... ?"
Does this imply mutual disappointment?
Not on your life, but the very reverse!
It does not even mean that You and I have
read each other's publication: it only means
that each of us has looked in it for the one
poem that is not in it, for the one poem that
we knew would not be in it. And there's no
disappointment in being right, is there?
Our favourite poem. too! As to how, or
when we decided upon what is our
'favourite' poem-that's the 'missing one',
you know-well, that's a mystery: one of
the principal mysteries of Literature, you
might say. And, if we happen to know each
other, the focal scur, as they say in the
vernacular, is "What could you expect
from so-and-so anyway?"
But, if You and I haven't to give back the
book too soon, we are liable to look further
into it- that is if we have time. But, even if
we haven't, being Irishmen we soon develop
a knowledge of the books we don't buy,
without reading them. The same holds for
the plays we don't see. It's somewhat akin
to our innate certainty of the existence of
ghosts, even while we are protesting that
we don't believe in them. It's a gift, I
suppose, that only flourishes in Ireland, like
the shamrock.
And, if we don't know each other from
Adam, there are two safe and sweeping
judgements that put ourselves and our books
in our places: they are: "A collection of
sentimentalities by a sentimentalist", and
"A kish of oddities gathered by an oul'
oddity"-. But, the most remarkable thing
about it is that if I fit into one of these
categories, you must inevitably fit into the
other: a psychological phenomenon, would
you say? And, another thing, you may be:
quite sure that it's categories the knowing
ones are after and not aesthetic enjoyment:
the other kind are merely looking for the:
piece they learned in 'Third Book', and if
you haven't that, say Casabianca, they
wouldn't dream of borrowing you even
from the County Library.
Dar diuch! Isn't it dangerous to go
anthologising! Yet, the opportunity being
given, who could resist the temptation?
But one should play fair and be quite
'personal', instead of playing 'safe' and being
completely impersonal: in brief, since one
is not on a teaching mission-definitely not
-he should confess to what rises to the
mind under the provocation of circumstances,
rather than the after-careful-consideration
choice. Then, what to call
such a collection? To name it an 'Occasional
Anthology' would be to invite misunderstandings, serious and jocose, even from folk
well versed in the use of the 'occasional
table'. Why, of course, that is what it is,
The Choice of Circumstance!
And, at once, my first selection has chosen
itself, for it is but yesterday that I was
speaking of it to a friend who was holding
forth upon the 'begging proclivities' of the
great mass of our contemporaries: "Every
man of them", said he, "wants a cement
flure for his pig-house!" thus recalling the
typical recipient of governmental benefice
in Rutherford Mayne's Bridgehead. The
word 'initiative' is obsolescent and the man
who would put in his own 'cement flure'
is regarded as a half-natural. His diatribe
brought to mind the earliest poem on self-help
written in Ireland in a language other
than Irish, the saga of the Entrenchment of
Ross, written in Norman-French in the
Ireland of the mid-thirteenth century.
The story goes that, because of a largescale
feud between Walter de Burgh of
Ulster and Maurice FitzMaurice of
Connacht, the whole land was in turmoil,
and the citizens of New Ross (settlers all)
determined to fence themselves in lest any
stray hay-makers should come their way.
The manner in which this was effected is
recounted by a probable eye-witness in a
poem of about two hundred lines, as we
now have it, which is as important to
literary history as that inland port was to
the commerce of the invaders of Leinster.
Incidentally, this town at the confluence of
the Nore and the Barrow is said to have been
founded by Dermot Mac Murrough's
grand-daughter, Isabel de Clare, though
the site had the earlier name of Ros-Mic-Treoin,
anglice Rose Macrune, with a wealth
of genealogical (and other) detail to support
the volksetymologie.
At any rate, the Council, having decided
upon the plans, hired more than a hundred
workmen for the task, and were about as
happy as impatient people are now with the
worker who knows that 'sober and easy
goes far in a day'. As I find it in Crofton
Croker's Popular Songs of Ireland in modern
verse:
More than a hundred workmen ply,
Daily, 'neath the townsmen's eye;
Yet small advance these fellows made,
Though to labour they were paid.
Maybe they were Irish anyway, and
couldn't care less.
But the exasperated burghers took counsel
again and decided to do it themselves,
organising their labour force according to
guild or social affinities.
Monday they began their labours,
Gay with banners, flutes and tabors;
Soon as the noon-hour was come ,
These good people hastened home,
With their banners proudly borne.
Those were the 'Vintners, drapers, merchants'.
Then the youth advanced in turn ,
And the town they made it ring
With their merry carolling;
Singing loud, and full of mirth ,
Away they go to shovel earth.
And the priests, when Mass was chanted,
In the fosse they dug and panted;
Quicker, harder, worked each brother,
Harder far than any other;
For both old and young did feel
Great and strong with holy zeal.
So, through the week, they strove manfully,
until by Saturday their man-power had been
exhausted apparently.
Then on Sunday there came down
All the dames of that brave town;
Know, good labourers were they,
But their numbers none may say.
On the ramparts there were thrown,
By their fair hands, many a stone;
Who had there a gazer been
Many a beauty might have seen.
Many a scarlet mantle too,
Or of green or russet hue;
Many a fair cloak had they,
And robes dight with colours gay.
In all lands where I have been
Such fair dames working I've not seen.
He who had to choose the power
Had been born in lucky hour.
Many a banner was displayed,
While the work the ladies aid.
When their gentle hands had done
Piling up rude heaps of stone,
Then they walked the fosse along,
Singing sweet a cheerful song;
And returning to the town,
All these rich dames there sat down;
Where, with mirth and wine and song,
Passed the pleasant hours along.
And, as in all verse of that period when
Chivalry (in its technical sense) ruled, we
find the courtly romantic note:
Then they said a gate they'd make,
Called the Ladies', for their sake,
And their prison there should be;
Whoso entered, straightway he
Should forego his liberty.
Lucky doom I ween is his,
Who a lady's prisoner is;
Light the fetters are to wear
Of a lady kind and fair.
The translation may not be a masterpiece of
literature- or of accuracy- but it serves to
point the moral. It recalls the old Vere
Foster 'headline' which we copied painfully
in the far-off days: ' If you want a thing well
done, go; if not, send'. But then, I suppose
the modern child copies no ' headlines'? Nor
does his reading contain such verse as that of
Sliabh Cuilinn, which was our meat-outside
of school-hours:
If ills at others' hands ye bear,
The cure is in YOUR OWN,
from a poem. entitled Ourselves Alone, which
title, as a slogan in another garb, Sinn Fein
Amháin! took the nation much fruther than
John O'Hagan ever imagined to be possible.
No! 'Twas because we dropped it that we
drifted into the 'State of Dependence'.
But, all this inevitably reminds one of a
step in the opposite direction. May I say a
'far-reaching' step in the opposite direction?
May God who dwells on high
Save and guard you, King Henry,
And give you also
Heart and courage and will
To avenge my shame and my misfortune
That my own people have brought upon me!
Hear, noble King Henry,
Whence I was born, of what country.
Of Ireland I was born a lord,
In Ireland acknowledged king;
But wrongfully my own people
Have cast me out of my kingdom.
To you I come to make a plaint, good sire,
In the presence of the barons of your empire.
Your liege - man I shall become
Henceforth all the days of my life,
On condition that you're my helper
So that I do not lose at all;
You I shall acknowledge as sire and lord
In the presence of your barons and earls.
Not much necessity for annotation here, is
there? We all know who went to Henry II
for help: and we all know how 'far-reaching'
that step was.
The poem was written in Norman-French
in the first quarter of the thirteenth
century by someone who claimed to be told
the details by Morice Regan, variously
described as secretary or interpreter (latimer)
to Dermot himself. The immediate result of
Dermot's 'plaint' was that
About three hundred crossed over,
Knights and common folk besides .
At Bannow they landed
With all their men.
When they had landed
And all had disembarked,
They made their men encamp
On the sea - shore.
The English folk sent word
To King Dermot by messenger
That at Bannow with three ships
They had at that time landed,
And that the king should speedily
Come there without delay.
And so began the long period of blood and
tears of which the end is not yet-seven
hundred and eighty-eight years this blessed
month of May! Not much Sinn Fein
Amháin about the Irish of those times, was
there? Three hundred men, not half of
them real fighting-men, and no one to
throw them back into the sea! But, then,
we have always had an inferiority complex.
Have we not allowed Helen of Troy to be
established as the acme of beauty for all
time, when the trouble she created was over
in a few years, except for the extra bother
some of the Greek lads brought upon themselves?
And Derbhfhorgaill's very name
tells us what an outstanding bright star she
was, not to mention the seven hundred and
eighty-eight years plus that her adventures
caused in the way of international disturbance!
Now, to-day, I had in mind this poem
that we are discussing when I was shocked
back to the present by the forceful remark
of a lady on the street. She was apparently
addressing a passing cyclist who had skilfully
evaded her when she stepped crabwise
from the side-walk into his path. Very
bitterly she said, 'The age of chivalry is
dead!' 'Thank God, madam! Thank God!'
said I, for I was thinking of that Age of
Chivalry, when the Normans were laying
the foundations of their conquest of Ireland
and were behaving just as they had behaved
a century earlier in England. What I had in
mind particularly was what had happened
the prisoners of Raymond the Fat ('le Gros'
sounds so respectable!) at Dundonuil in
1170, all seventy of them:
But the noble knights
Had them beheaded.
To a wench they gave
An axe of tempered steel,
And she beheaded them all
And then flung their bodies over the cliff,
Because she had that day
Lost her lover in the combat.
Alice of Abervenny was her name
Who served the Irish thus.
In order to disgrace the Irish
The knights did this.
Very keenly they must have felt the disgrace
in that Age of Chivalry! Even Keating's
bete noire, Gerald of Wales, takes a poor view
of that example of 'Chivalry'.
I fear that I am being, as an Englishman
would say, ' typically Irish', which means
that I forget nothing but that charitable
saying, 'Other times, other manners', which
the English adopted from the French. How
do they translate that comfortable saying
into Bantu, Modern Greek, Egyptian, or
even Hungarian? Now, if they would only
admit that the 'jack-boot' is built on the
same last in all climes and at all times, the
mind of the 'typical Irishman' might stray
into paths trodden by gentle feet, calced and
discalced, even when his ancestors were
being taught the 'laws of Chivalry' by the
buatis. He will not find much written in,
or appertaining to, Ireland in the very early
period, for the corpus of Anglo-Norman is
small in any case. And, by the time that
English had routed French in England, Irish
had almost got the upper hand here, for the
Statute of Kilkenny was not passed without
cause, in l366. Indeed, had Art MacMurrough
Kavanagh (who died in 1417, allegedly of
English poison) been possessed of National
vision, he might have thrown all the
colonists into the sea, lock, stock and barrel.
But he did not, so the Anglo-Irish
Anthology did not die at birth.
Yet, ere we leave the Anglo-Norman for
the English which supplanted it, let us have
a short specimen of the speech itself. And
what could be more appropriate than the
writer's opinion of the one who brought
him and his language to Ireland?
Del rei dermod vus voil conter.
En yrland, a icel ior,
Ni out reis de tel valur;
Asez esteit manans e richez ,
Amale francs, hailes chiches
which has been Englished:
About King Dermod I will tell you.
In Ireland, at this day ,
There was not a king of such worthiness;
He was very powerful and rich.
He loved the open-handed, he hated the stingy.
Assuredly he must have been the precursor
Of An Bord Failte: the first Tourist Attraction!
The 'typical Irishman' will not be surprised to learn that there was much heavy
piety in the writings of his early invaders,
for he knows that the Iron Heel was wont
to be stamped with a pious slogan-all
'subject' peoples have been aware of that,
from Crecy to Drogheda and on to BudaPest,
though it is now 'The Will of the
People' instead of Dieu et mon Droit, or Gott
mit uns, God having been temporarily
exiled from the thirteenth meridian and
parts East. But just as I am poised for a
tirade against hypocritical injustice over the
wide world, a sweet, soft voice catches my
attention with
Icham of Irlaunde,
Ant of the holy londe
Of Irlande.
Gode sire, pray ich pe (thee)
For of saynte charite,
Come ant daunce wyt me
In Irlaunde.
The sweet, soft voice has been still for six
centuries, but its whispered echo in the
corridors of time has blown my righteous
anger away, and I remember that this
anonymous singer had an almost- contemporary
whom we know as 'Friar Michael of
Kildare'. He could say,
This world's love is gone away
As dew on grass in summer's day.
But his sermon has such charm, and its
lyrical lilt so well survives the necessary
normalising of the spelling, that one does
not realise that he is being preached at:
Sweet Jesus, hend and free,
(gracious and generous)
That was istrawgt on roode tree,
(stretched on the cross)
Now and ever with us be,
And us shield from sin.
Let thou not to helle te (draw)
They that be herein!
So bright of ble, Thou hear me,
(countenance)
Hope of all mankyn,
Do us isee the Trinity,
(Cause us to see)
And heavenriche to win.
(kingdom of heaven)
This Friar, whether Grey or Black we know
not, was a realist and he pulled no punches.
Here are his sixth, seventh and eighth
stanzas, decked out in all their complicated
rime- scheme but none the less telling for
that:
Rich man, bethink thee !
Take good heede, what thou be.
Thou art not but a brotil tree
(wretched, worthless)
Of shorte seven foot,
Ischrid without with gold and fee-
( Clad . .. money)
The axe is at the root;
The fiend unfree halt all to glee
(ignoble ... will very gleefully)
This tree adown to root.
So might I thee, I rede thee flee !
(prosper . .. I counsel thee )
And do thy soul its bote. (remedy)
Now thou art in ro and rest (quiet)
Of all the land thou art the mest
(most, greatest)
Thou dost no strength of God's behest
(require, ask)
Of death why wilt thou not think?
When thou thinkest to live best
Thy body Death shall quench.
The poor chest shall be thy nest (coffin)
That sittest bold on bench;
East and west shall be thy quest,
And mightest thou nothing blench.
(turn from)
Be thou baron other knight, (or)
Thou shalt be a sorrowful wight,
When thou liest on bier itight
(decked out)
In fulle poor weed; (garment)
Thou hast neither main nor might,
(strength)
Whilst thou no man will dread;
With sorrowful sight-and that is right - To
earth men shall thee lead;
Bethink thee, this I rede. (counsel)
And in his last two stanzas, fourteen and
fifteen, the good Friar looks to his own
needs:
Jesu, King of heaven free, (noble)
Ever iblessed mayest thou be!
Lord, I beseech thee,
To me thou take heed.
From deadly sin thou keep me
While I live on lede.
(amongst the people)
The maid free that bare thee
So sweetly under weed (clothes)
Do us to see the Trinity
(Cause us to see)
All we have the need. (We all)
This song wrought a friar [...]
(menour? or prechour?)
Jesus Christ be his succour,
Lord, bring him to the tower,
Friar Michael Kildare;
Shield him from helle bower
When he shall from hence fare!
Lady, flower of all honour,
Cast away his care;
From the schour of paines sure (attack)
Thou shield him here and there! Amen!
There is a 'singing' quality in almost
everything composed in verse in the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries, which
comes over even in translations-for which
I am indebted to Doctor St. John D.
Seymour for the greater part and to Miss J.
Weston as well as to Crofton Croker' s
translator-testifying to a belief that poetry
should be heard and not merely read by the
eye, as some moderns pretend to believe.
Yes, they were great singers, those invaders
of our private wars: if you insist that many
of them were great scoundrels, I should not
contradict, for there seems to be no incompatibility-
wasn't Spenser an 'undertaker',
and wasn't Milton Latin secretary to
Cromwell?
Now, the thought that while Spenser
immortalised Irish scenery in his Faerie
Queene, he did not stay long enough to
become absorbed by the atmosphere, raises
the question of whether our Anglo-Normans
had become somewhat Irish by
the time with which we are dealing here.
Of course, we all know of some of the great
lords who became so wedded to the soil
they had seized as to fight for it; but, in
times when there was far more unity of
mind in Europe than is even hoped for
to-day, when the springs of Parnassus
seemed channelled into the Seine, was there
any touch of 'Irishness' in this literature that
seemed so completely 'continental' in form?
And why not, when we see the influence of
the wider sphere upon writing in Irish at the
time?
I do not propose to perambulate the
literary ground with a sort of mine-detector
in the shape of a tuning-fork, or a
geiger-counter formed like a metronome,
looking for 'the Celtic Note' and 'Celtic
Influence'. I shall put before you one piece,
as an example, and the only proof I shall
deign to adduce is the rhetorical question,
'Could it have been written anywhere else?
The composition referred to is called The
Land of Cokaygne, and it is a satire, though a
comparatively gentle one in a country where
satires were expected to raise blisters after
the manner of mustard plasters. Lack of
space and presence of discretion prohibit
q notation in full, but these extracts will
recall to educated Irish readers The Vision of
Mac Conglinne, of contemporary or slightly
earlier composition, which amused our
younger days as An Craos Deamhan by An
tAthair Peadar. There are similar 'poems' in
other languages, but one does not have to
set off on a detective hunt for 'borrowings'
or 'copyings', as pictures of 'The Happy
Land' exist in all folklores. Under religious
tutelage it becomes a kind of materialisation
of Paradise: under stress of scarcity and
hunger it becomes a visualisation of 'Good
Kitchen' ; and, sure enough coquina means
just kitchen-I object to the common spelling
' Cockaine ', which hides the meaning,
though 'cocks' may be welcome in the
kitchen. In our poem, the condiment of
satire is added to the 'kitchen ', as indeed it is
in the Irish where the seasoning is for
stronger palates. But here we go:
Far in the sea, west of Spain,
Is a land that's named Cokaygne,
There is no land under heavenriche
(kingdom of heaven )
Of wealth, of goodness, it iliche
(like to it)
Though Paradise be merry and bright
Cokaygne is of fairer sight.
What is there in Paradise
But, grass and flowers and green ris?
(branches)
Though there be joy and great dute
(pleasure)
There is no food but only fruit;
There is no hall, bower, nor bench ,
But water for man his thirst to quench.
There be no men but two,
Hely and Enok also; (Elias and Enoch)
Elinglich may they go (sorrowfully)
Where there dwelleth men no mo.
(no more men)
In Cokaygne is meat and drink
Without care, thought and swynk;
(labour)
The meat is choice, the drink is clear,
At noon, russin and supper.
(mid-day meal)
I say for sooth, boute were,
(without doubt)
There is no land on earth its peer,
Under the heavens no land iwis,
(certainly)
Of so great joy and bliss.
There is many a sweete sight,
All is day, there is no night.
There is neither quarrel nor strife,
There is no death, but ever life,
There is no lack of meat nor cloth,
There is no man nor woman wroth,
There is no serpent, wolf, nor fox,
Horse nor capil, cow nor ox,
(I think 'foal' here)
There is no sheep, nor swine, nor goat.
Nothing unclean, lo! God it wot.
(God knows it)
Neither harace nor stode,
(stable nor stud?)
The land is full of every good.
There is no fly, flea, nor louse,
In cloth, in farm, in bed nor house;
There is no thunder, sleet nor hail,
Neither a vile worm nor snail,
There is no storm, rain or wind,
There is no man nor woman blind.
But all is sport and joy and glee,
Lucky is he who there may be.
There are rivers great and fine,
Of oil, milk, honey and wine.
Water serveth there to no thing
But to boil and to washing,
There is all manner of fruit,
All is solace and dedute (delight)
There is a right fair abbey
(Perhaps in Kildare)
Both of white monks and of grey,
(Carmelites and Franciscans)
There be bowers and halls,
All of pasties be the walls,
Of flesh, of fish, and of rich meat,
The pleasantest that men may eat .
Flouren cakes be the shingles all
Of church and cloister, bower and hall.
The pins be fat puddings,
(pinnacles ?)
Rich meat for princes and kings.
Men may thereof eat enow
All with right and not with wogh.
(wrong)
In the lawn there is a tree
Very pleasant 'tis to see.
The roots are ginger and galingale,
(spice root)
The branches be all sedwale,
(ginger-like root)
Of choicest mace is the flower,
(nutmeg spice)
The bark cinnamon of sweet odour,
The fruit gillyflower of good smack,
(taste)
Of cubebs there is no lack;
(peppery spice- berry)
There be roses of red ble, (colour)
And lilies very fair to see,
That never fade day nor night,
This should be a goodly sight.
There are four wells in the abbey,
Of treacle and of halwei,
(healing medicine)
Of balm and also piement,
(spiced wine)
Ever flowing to right rent. (profit)
Yet I do you more to wit:
(give you more information)
The geese roasted on the spit
Fly to that abbey, so God wot, (knows)
Crying ' Geese, all hot, all hot!'
They bring of garlic great plenty,
The best prepared that one may see.
The leverokes that be cuth
(the larks that are trained)
Fly down to a man's mouth ,
Stewed they are, and right well done,
Stuffed with cloves and with cinnamon.
Of any drink there be, at will
Every man may take his fill.
After meat the monks naturally grow somewhat frisky, particularly the young ones,
but the Abbot knows well how to bring
them under restraint, and so we'll leave
them to his paternal care.
Another abbey is there by,
Forsooth a great fair nunnery,
Upon a river of sweet milk
Where is plenty great of silk .
When the summer day is hot
The young nuns take a boat
And do them forth in that river
Both with oars and with stere.
But we shall leave them to their 'divarsion',
for we are at once reminded of our Irish
MacConglinne and some of the visions he
told of when trying to inveigle the 'Demon
of Gluttony' out of the bread-basket of
Cathal MacFinguine, King of Munster,
'whilst putting two morsels or three at a
time past Cathal' s mouth into his own" :
A vision I beheld last night:
I sallied forth with two or three ,
When I saw a fair and well-filled house,
In which there was great store of food.
A lake of new milk I beheld
In the midst of a fair plain.
I saw a well-appointed house
Thatched with butter.
As I went all around it
To view its arrangement:
Puddings fresh-boiled,
They were its thatch-rods.
Its two soft door-posts of custard,
Its dais of curds and butter,
Beds of glorious lard ,
Many shields of thin pressed cheese.
Agus mar sin de, which would have fetched
the demon out in stanter but that the other
half of a very long composition has to be
told before that 'consummation devoutly to
be wished' can take place.
But, returning to our ' imported ' singers,
we can find philosophic amusement in the
reflection that at all times things seem to be
much of a muchness; as the French say,
" the more it changes, the more it is the
same thing". Don't we all know that Faith
and Morals, the Language and Customs, and
soon are being rapidly ruined by the
Crosby-Laine-Presley line of groaners? But
we have not yet heard of any bishop of our
time driven to the straits to which Bishop
Richard de Ledrede of Ossory (1317 to
1360) was driven. He is believed to be the
author of some sixty religious songs,
written to popular, if profane, tunes in
order to keep his clergy off the word seven
though he couldn't obliterate the rhythm.
' Rock'n Roll' in the fourteenth century!
What was it like? Well, here is an episcopal
witness, or auditor:
Da, da nobis nunc,
Da nunc corrigere mores,
Virtutum carpere flores:
Da, da nobis nunc.
No doubt about the strophic 'steps' in the
second line and the anti-strophic in the
third, is there? And the 'batter' in the first
and fourth? But, perhaps, the original was
The Walls of Kilkenny! Poor Bishop de
Ledrede, and all that he had been through
with the Witch of Kilkenny, Dame Alice
Kyteler!
And then there was the joker who wrote
a satire on women to the air of the Stab at
Mater!
This piece, which might be turned to his
own advantage by a member of the Coisde
Gnotha, is a sign of the times and of the
drift towards 'going native' that called for
the Statute of Kilkenny:
By granting charters of peace
To false English, without lease
(without lying, verily)
This land shall be much undo.
But gossipred and alterage,
(fosterage)
And losing of our language
Have mickly holp thereto.
(greatly helped)
It must be remembered that the social-and-
religious organisation of that time was
very different from that (is it not 'those'?)
of to- day. On the religious side, there were
two divisions, Catholics and heretics: it was
as simple as that, except for an odd spot of
bother from Mohammedans and occasional
persecutions of the unfortunate Jews, when
an impecunious monarch wanted to screw
[sic] the last bawbee from them. Religion
was as much part of the social organisation
then, as it is, and always has been, part of the
Jewish racial organisation. Hence, there was
no self-consciousness about religion, as
there is to- day even in Ireland-or especially
in Ireland? So, if 'Brother Sebastian' slipped,
or tripped, literally, it did not presage the
fall of the Church, but was just a good
joke; if he slipped, or tripped, metaphorically,
it was merely a better joke. And many
of the lampoons that seem to us quite
outrageous were nothing but good humoured raillery, not deserving of the
title of 'Satire'. Indeed, the worst of them
were probably due to 'professional' jealousy,
or spite. Moreover, practically everybody
who could write was in orders, major or
minor, and had certainly been taught by
men 'in orders' -men who had the flair for
writing 'took orders'. The mise-en-scene of
Browning's Fra Lippo Lippi is no figment of
the imagination.
Which leads me to what has been
wrongly called a Satire on the People of
Kildare, merely because it appears in the
manuscript with Friar Michael's effort. Now,
whether it is Kildare or Dublin that is the
happy hunting-ground of this 'satirist' of
Six Orders, there is no doubt about its
starting-point being stained-glass church
windows; and there are more than Six of
them, which is quite understandable as the
Guilds had their places in the stained-glass
frequently. The whole is quite comprehensible if you picture this joker as recalling
the themes of various windows well known
to his readers and hearers-and only then:
Hail, Saint Michael with the long spear!
Fair be thy wings upon thy shoulder!
Thou hast a red kirtle anon to thy feet,
Thou art the best angel that God ever made!
This verse is full well iwrought ,
'Tis from very far ibrought.
Hail, Saint Christopher with thy long stake!
Thou hearest our Lord Jesus Christ over
the broad lake.
Many great congers swim about thy feet .
How many herrings for a penny at
Westcheap in London?
This verse is of holy writ,
It comes of noble wit.
Hail, Saint Dominic with thy long staff!
It is at the top end crooked like a gaff;
Thou hearest a book on thy back, I think
it is a bible.
Though thou be a good clerk, be thou not
too high.
Trie rime la! God is wot
(a choice rime, God knows)
Such another on earth is not.
Hail, Saint Francis, with thy many jowls,
(birds)
Kites and crows, ravens and owls,
Four and twenty wild ges and a peacock!
Many a bold beggar jolloweth thy route.
This verse is full well iset ,
From right far it was ifet.
Hail be ye friars with the white copes
(Carmelites)
Ye have a house at Drogheda, where men
make ropes.
Ever ye be roving the land all about;
Of the water-dashers ye rob the churches.
(sprinklers?)
Master he was very good
(he was a very good master)
That this sentence understood.
Frankly, I do not understand what the
obviously topical and local point of that is.
But it is very clear that the 'maker' of this
was well known to his audience, and that
the verses were not at all fetched from afar:
coupled with his cheeky 'pats on the back'
for himself, it would argue that while he
was known, he was unknown (as the author)
-like the author of Red Brick University in
our own time. But let us have a couple of
verses about the laymen in the windows:
Hail be ye merchants with your great packs
Of drapery, avoirdupois, and your woolsacks,
(goods by weight)
Gold, silver, stones, rich marks, and eke
pounds! (13 / 4)
Little give ye thereof to the wretched poor.
Sly he was and full of wit,
That this lore put in writ.
Hail be ye tailors with your sharp shears!
To make wrong hoods ye cut many gores.
Against midwinter hot be your needles;
Though your seams seem fair, they last a
short while.
The clerk that this baston wrought,
(type of verse)
Well he woke, and slept right nought.
Of course, there were serious, and even
vicious, attacks on the Friars, some of whom
were personae non gratae with the bishops.
Now, in the mediaeval 'Miracle Plays'
there are situations and dialogue that shock
our modern taste, though they were
intended to 'bring home' religious truths to
an audience which did not keep God in
moth-balls all the week and bring Him out
on Sunday with the 'best snit'. We still have
the expression of that straining-after-effect
mentality in some of the vulgar 'holy
pictures' and rococo Cribs, produced 'with
the best intentions'. And here is a dour
enemy of the Franciscans, writing for the
'Sunday Papers', as it were, about the overrealistic
presentation of The Crucifixion :
They have done Him on a cross far up in the
sky,
And fastened on Him wings, as He should fly.
This false feigned belief they shall sour aby,
(pay for)
On that lovely Lord so for to lie.
With an O and an I, one sayeth full still,
Armachan destroy them, if it is God's will!
His appeal is to Richard FitzRalph, Archbishop
of Armagh, who did not love the
Friars.
Here is 'Pro Bono Publico' writing to the
Evening . . . about 'The Thing' on
O'Connell Bridge so recently. The set-piece
was apparently ' Elias ascending to Heaven
in a Fiery Chariot':
A cart was made all of fire, as it should be;
A grey friar I saw therein, that best pleased me.
W ell I wot they shall be burnt, by my leute;
(loyalty)
God grant me that g race that I may it see.
With an O and an I, burnt be they all!
And all that help thereto fair mote befall!
Like the poor, they are always with us!
Their motto is 'Praise the Lord and pass the
ammunition!'
No! I have not been deliberately avoiding
'the sentimental', whether concerned with
sacred or profane Love. Naturally, of
written remains there is more of the former
than of the latter; but even the writers of
the former admit the power of the latter, as
apparently the devil himself did:
Why come he rather to Eve
(old past tense-'came')
Than he come to Adam?
I shall tell you, sirs, believe,
(at once)
For woman is lef ever to man. (dear)
Woman may turn man his will
Where she will pilt her to;
(turn her to)
That is the reason and the skill
That the devil come first her to.
Yes, " the more it changes, the more it is
the same thing"! But, on the other side of
the account, we find that The Mother of
God takes pride of place in the lyrical
poetry of the Anglo-Norman period and
long after. Even in the fifteenth century the
poets acknowledged that
Mother and maiden
Was never none but she;
Well may such a lady
Codes mother be.
So, let us end on the soft note with a
verse found in, above all places, an account-roll
of the Priory of Holy Trinity, Dublin:
Jay en vous tout ma fyance,
Ma bele dame, par ma foy,
Et de autry ne ay souvenance;
Qar fors que vous nat pussance
De rejoer le coer de moy. etc.
which Seymour has in modern English as:
My trust's in you, my lady fair,
I love none other, this I swear;
For none, in truth, but you has power
To give my heart one happy hour.
Believe me, lady, just the sight
Of you affords me keen delight;
For when I gaze on you, iwis,
I am filled with joy and bliss .
And, if you murmur 'kish of oddities
gathered by an oul' oddity', what can I say
but touché! ?
