If you follow Percy French's directions
and turn to the left at the bridge of
Finea, you can't miss Lough Sheelin. And
if you are interested in trout fishing, or
bathing on a sandy bottom, or beautiful
scenery, or historic associations, you should
not miss it. When Samuel Lewis was writing
up Finea in his Topographical Dictionary of
Ireland- long before Percy French immortalised itself and Ballyjamesduff in song
he spelt it ' Finae', and described it as 'a
village in the county of Westmeath on the
confine of the county of Cavan consisting
of 45 house badly built, and in a rate of
dilapidation.' It takes some time to live
down a description like that, but Hi-Regan
A pleasant view of the Lough
was kinder to it when he was writing his
How and Where to Fish in Ireland seventy
years ago. Finea, he said, was the true
station for Sheelin, boats and boatmen were
available there, and also fair lodgings 'or
really good accommodation in an old-fashioned
pub near the bridge.' And Hi-Regan
liked his comfort and knew his pubs.
The Guide Books have seldom done
justice to Cavan or Westmeath, with the
result that Lough Sheelin has only been
discovered by the most relentless anglers.
Heretofore, interest was quickly lost once
the dapping season was over, and when the
May-fly is late in rising, the dapping season
can be notoriously short. Anglers have come
from England and Scotland for the dapping
and caught little or nothing. Hi-Regan
noted in his book that the Sheelin fishing
was not all as generally good as it was
previously, because pike had multiplied and
extended their preying. This state of things
got steadily worse in the first half of this
century until the Inland Fisheries Trust
Waiting for the boat
chose Sheelin in 1952 as the first lake in
Ireland for clearing systematically of pike
and re-stocking with trout. It was chosen
because the experts who had studied the
business in Sweden and elsewhere had
pronounced Sheelin the most likely lake
in Ireland to respond to scientific treatment.
And how right they were.
Sheelin is an excellent limestone lake
in general ten feet deep, covering 2,000
acres, eight miles in length and in parts two
or three miles wide. It contains many small
islands, on one of which are the ruins of an
old castle and a church. The island is called
Church Island, and tradition associates the
church, which is called Friars' Chapel, with
Saint Carthach, dating it around 504. On
the shores of the lake are the ruins of Ross
Castle- the home of the infamous Black
Baron-and the ruins of many places which
belonged to the 'gentry' who had such an
unerring sense of direction to even the most
out-of-the-way places in search of beautiful
surroundings. Though there are still many
'gentlemen’s places' around the lake, the
old exclusively aristocratic atmosphere is
happily there no longer.
Stephen Gwynn, in The Charm of Ireland,
tells of a day he spent on Sheelin on which
the scenic attractions more than made up
for the lack of fish. Noting that the big
waters of Westmeath-Ennel, Owel, Derravaragh, and Sheelin- were known only to
anglers, he says: ' As for Sheelin, I spent a
day there fishing, most unprofitably if the
catch was considered, but delightfully for
anyone who likes to bask in sunlight on
water or by water, with low, wooded hills
to look at, and cattle grazing in meadows,
and men and women piling the black turf
into little ricks to dry.' A trifle too idyllically
pastoral, perhaps, but Gywnn does
not mean to convey the idea that Sheelin
is all scenery and no fish. Elsewhere in his
book he recounts that, though it is scarcely
fished at all after the clapping season, a
friend of his caught with the wet fly one
afternoon in September, 1926, five trout
weighing fifteen pounds, the biggest five
and a half. He also saw a fish rise in the
Inny river of four or five pounds. Anywhere
else he would have taken it for a salmon.
Like so many other five-pounders, this one
got away, but it convinced Gwynn that a
river holding such fish was worth exploring
especially with dry fly.

Myles the Slasher
and the Bridge of Finea
The river Inny rises in Meath, touches
Cavan, flows through Sheelin, divide
Longford from Westmeath, and eventually
Reaches the Shannon at Lough Ree. At
Finea it is spanned by a stone bridge of
nine arches. This is the bridge which was
defended so spectacularly, though tradition
is much surer of this than the higher critics,
by the Irish Horatius Codes, Myles the
Slasher. A big cross was erected in Finea in
the l940's, giving day and date for the
battle and giving all the glory to Myles.
Myles the Slasher was Malmore, son
of Brian, son of John, son of Edmund
O'Reilly, the Chief of Kilnacrott (which
is well-known nowadays for its beautiful
abbey belonging to the Order of Premonstratensians). Myles was an able military
leader in the Wars of the Confederacy of
1641-43. When encamped with Lord
Castlehaven at Granard, he was ordered
to proceed with a detachment of horse to
defend the bridge of Finea against the Scots
who were then bearing down on the main
army with a very superior force. Myles, so
goes the tradition, was killed while fighting
bravely on the middle of the bridge.
What made his performance so memorable was his encounter in single combat
with the Colonel of the Scots who laid
open his cheek with a blow of his sword.
But Myles, whose jaws were stronger than
the vice of a smith, held fast the Scotsman's
sword between his teeth till he cut him
down. The defence of the bridge has
been immortalised in a local poem
which has one at least of the qualities of an epic-length.
For obvious reasons, which will
get more obvious as we proceed, it can
only be given here in snatches.
First, the historical setting:
Castlehaven has forded the Shannon
With the soldiers of brave Owen Roe,
And hurriedly marching to meet him
Press forward the troops of Munroe.
Preparing for a day's fishing
The Scots are described in all their fine
fury and equestrian abandon:
They reined not their steeds till before them
Fair Granard loomed up on their way ,
Then with shining banners and bayonets
They halt at the bridge of Finea.
Things look grim enough for the Irish
side until the Slasher makes his appearance:
But there on the bridge stood O'Reilly
The Slasher from Cavan's green side,
Around him blazed many a sabre
And above him his banner spread wide.
The Irish get the worst of exchanges: they
fall one by one, until Myles is left in solitary
glory. He is nothing daunted.
Come on, ye fierce hell-hounds of Cromwell,
We'll meet your false swords undismayed,
We promised you graves, and you'll get them
While O'Reilly can handle a blade.
The forces of Castlehaven came to Myles's
rescue, so the poem goes, but arrived too
late:
For the flag of the brave Castlehaven
Pressing on to the combat is seen
And ten thousand bright bayonets are flashing
Round his standard of emerald green.
They rush to the bridge where the Slasher
So bravely his banner unrolled,
But, alas for the cause of green Erin
The heart of the hero is cold.
Myles, then, is given all the virtues of a
man by the poet, but there is no mention
of him holding the sword of the Scotsman
between his teeth. This highly dramatic
detail, if it were historical, would hardly
have escaped a ballad-maker who was
clearly the sort who believed in giving his
readers value for their money.
There is another poetic effusion by a local
Mountnugent poet, Phil O'Connell, which
deals with the highly sentimental love story
of Orwin and Sebana which was played out
to its sad ending on Lough Sheelin between
Ross Castle and Church Island. This poem
appears in O'Connell's National Poems
(1829). In plain, unvarnished prose the story
is something like this. Orwin was a follower
of Myles the Slasher who had to fly into
hiding after the Cromwellian war. He took
refuge on Church Island. Ross Castle, on
the shore nearby, was owned by the Black
Baron, one of Cromwell's followers. He
had an only daughter, Sebana. One night
as Sebana was wandering by the shores of
the lake she heard strange music from the
island. She called her boatman, ordered him
to row her across, and there she met and fell
in love with Orwin, her father's sworn
enemy. Sebana rowed across each day to
keep tryst with her lover. After a time
Sebana fell ill and Orwin did not see or
hear from her for weeks. Thinking she
had proved faithless he began to pine away,
and eventually died of grief When Sebana
recovered she wandered along the shore
in the moonlight singing the songs that
Orwin had taught her. The ghost of Orwin
appeared to her, told her of his death, and
made one request of her- that she would
bury his body on the island in the spot
where she first pledged her love. This she
faithfully did, and died herself soon after,
and, fittingly, they were both interred in
the same grave.
But let the poet speak for himself, at
least in snatches. There is a Virgilian flavour
about his opening lines:
Wild shone the moon o'er Sheelin's wave
And silent night involved the world
When Orwin left his secret cave
Where round his home the white wave
curled.
His sadness is conveyed in his musings on
the great names of O'Neill and O'Donnell.
Across from him
Fair Ross displays its lofty towers
and there dwelt the future object of his
affections:
Sebana was the fair one named
The proud Black Baron's only daughter;
For tender love and fondness famed,
Yet lovers in vain besought her.
A bit halting, that last line admittedly,
but it puts her in the select class of the
great lovers of history, the sad-eyed solitaries.
The music from the island, the crossing,
and the meeting are duly described. Orwin
tells her who he is:
'Orwin,' exclaimed the smiling maid,
Her glistening eyes in gladness beaming,
'And art thou he so fierce in war
So terrible in red fields streaming?
When warriors filled my father's hall
Oft have I heard that name repeated.'
Their love grew and soon Orwin
mustered up enough courage 'to rove
within her father's bowers.' Then came her
illness and Orwin's misgivings:
Hours, days, and weeks slow passed away,
No bounding boat came o'er the waters.
More wretched each succeeding day
Then fickle and inconstant thought her.
After her recovery to health she encounters
his ghost:
She saw his face, 'twas wild and pale,
His hollow eyes were sunk and glazing,
His uncombed locks flee to the gale
And blue the lips once sweetly pleasing.
He makes his request about burial:
And when the bloom of early spring
Refresh my grave with genial showers,
Then grateful offerings with thou bring
And strew my clay-cold bed with flowers.
She soon joined him in death:
And oftentime in dead of night
Is seen the proud Black Baron's daughter
By the side of Orwin ,gliding bright
And roaming o'er Lough Sheelin's water.
Sheelin was unfortunate that it did not
find a Yeats to immortalise it as did
Lo ugh Gill , for the story of Orwin and
Sebana is entirelv credible in a lake with
the magical name' of Sheelin: the Fairy Pool.

The black funeral
There is a strange story about a funeral
on Sheelin, which, truth to tell, is told
about many another lake. When the monks
lived on Church Island their cemetery was
strictly confined to priests and monks. But
one of the O'Reilly' s, Lord of Ross Castle,
took a strange notion to be buried in the
friars' graveyard, and-before his death - gave
orders to that effect. This Lord of Ross
died during a severe frost and his funeral
procession, headed by a vested priest,
Happy man on Lough Sheelin
walked across the frozen lake in the direction
of Church Island. Half way across,
the ice broke, and the corpse and funeral
procession were drowned, but tradition
allows that the vested priest escaped, and
says that he afterwards lived a hermit's life
on the Island. Every hundred years, in the
month of December, the Black Funeral is
seen crossing from Ross and sinking in the
same spot. But don't ask me when the next
crossing is expected!
All this and fish too
Sheelin, then, has its share of song and
story, scenic attractions and historic association.
Lately, too, its fishermen have been
getting more than their share of fish, so
that on their way home they can make
their own of Piscator's remark to the milkwoman:
'God speed, good woman, I have
been afishing, and am going to Bleak Hall
to my bed, and having caught more fish
than will sup myself and friend, will bestow
this upon you and your daughter...'
And if he be a tourist it will be no Bleak
Hall he will be staying in, for, as in Walton,
there is more than one 'honest Alehouse'
where we shall find a cleanly room,
lavender in the windowes, and twenty
ballads stuck about the wall.'
The increase in the number of fish is due
entirely to the exertions of the Inland
Fisheries Trust. They began a ten-year plan
in 1952 to restore Sheelin to its one-time
status as one of the premier trout lakes in
Ireland, and so successful have their efforts
proved that already, after only six years,
their main work on Sheelin is triumphantly
completed. Off the Finea-Kilnaleck road
you can see their Field Headquarters, Trout
Hatcheries and Experimental Station. Pike
and perch have been removed in thousands
by electrical and netting devices, and a
million and a half trout have been fed into
the lake from the Hatcheries, which also
despatch orders to all parts of Ireland,
England and Scotland. The fruits of this
work are already apparent. In the 1940's
hardly a dozen boats were to be seen on
Sheelin. Last year at the height of the
season the number was nearer two hundred,
and extensive catches were the order of the
day. A great deal of n10ney has been spent
on the development of the Inland Fisheries,
but it is an investment which should
pay rich dividends in making life happier
both for the communities surrounding the
inland waters and for the tourists who are
being attracted to them in ever-increasing
numbers.
Fishing will no longer be confined on
Sheelin to the clapping season either. This
year a priest fisherman (and priests hereabouts
are conveniently proud of the fact
that most of the apostles were fishermen)
caught three trout weighing over ten
pounds at the beginning of March. In
inviting anglers to Sheelin, the locals can
say with more than usual confidence that
there are lots of good fish in the sea, for
the very good reason that they saw them
being put there by the thousand. Granted
even average angling skill, the conventional
greeting, ' tight lines', should be amply
rewarded. Failing that you will have to
make the most of the one that got away.
