The files of old newspapers make
interesting reading. There you will
find history recorded as it was made.
It does not matter much what were the
political opinions current at the time, the
truth will leak out, as it does "even in an
affidavit" - to quote a celebrated Irish judge.
The Cork Constitution during the last
century was the chief Press organ of the
powerful Ascendancy class in Munster.
From its columns are extracted the opinions
and items of news recorded here. I have
simply strung them. together in narrative
form with explanatory comment of my
own which is entirely different from. the
editorial comments at the time they first
saw the light.
On 25 February, 1847, the Reverend
Denis M. Collins, P.P., Mallow, Co. Cork,
and the Reverend Justin McCarthy, C.C.,
of the same place arrived in London, to
see the Premier, Lord John Russell, and
represent the famine-stricken condition of
their people and ask him what he was
prepared to do to alleviate their condition.
They were received courteously at 10
Downing Street and made their plea. In
reply to the Premier's questions Father
Collins aid he was aware that those visitations
had previously recurred, though not
to the present appalling extent. He had
served as curate in the parishes of Skibbereen
and Tullagh in 1832, and many people had
to get relief, but nothing to the same extent
as at present.
There was no reserve amongst the people.
The owners of the soil in Ireland for the
most part had as their chief thought in
life the extortion of as much rent as
possible from. their tenantry, and acted like
an army surgeon who feels the pulse of a
man on the triangle to see how many
additional strokes he could bear without
exhaustion. In the same manner they
endeavoured to extract as much as possible
from their tenants save the little that was
absolutely necessary for the cultivation of
the soil. Hence, the people were always in
a state of exhaustion and unable to bear up
against any sudden affliction.
The farmer asked why should he cultivate
the land when the landlord will distrain
all the produce for the rent. He suggested
that Parliament should immediately pass a
law whereby only one-third of the crops
sown since last September should be liable
to seizure for rent. He read to the Premier
a letter he had received from. Doctor Trail,
rector of Schull, relating how a poor
woman in that parish had taken her two
little children, one dead, one dying, to the
graveside. Having scraped out a grave for
the dead child, she laid it within, and sat
by the grave until the other child would
die, so that they could be both buried
together.
Lord John Russell in course of his reply
said it was a great misfortune in Ireland to
see such mistrust existing between landlord
and tenant, so as to interfere with the proper
cultivation of the soil. Could not the
Roman Catholic clergy, for instance, do
their part and admonish their people to
lay aside the apathy that had seized upon
them and use better methods of cultivation?
This remark brought the fiery young
curate to his feet and he replied: "My lord,
we have advised our people and have done
our best to improve their system of cropping;
but the landlords have been accustomed to
demand as their just rent everything the
land produced save as much of the potato
crop as was necessary for the support of
those who tilled the soil. The potatoes have
now failed and they have nothing else to
live on". The Premier thanked the reverend
clergymen for what they had said and so
they left Downing Street.
On the same day that this interview
appeared in the Cork paper, an article
was reprinted from the London Sunday
Observer, which shows how little the situation
in Ireland was understood in official
circles: " It is learned that the Government
have resolved forthwith to dispatch M.
Sayer, Chef de Cuisine of the Reform
Club, London, to Ireland with instructions
to provide his famous soup for the people
there. Artificers are working in London
night and day to provide the kitchens and
and other culinary appendages. His plans
have been examined and approved by the
Admiralty and the Board of Works. This
soup has been served to the best judges of
the noble art of gastronomy in the Reform
Club and they have pronounced it excellent.
A bellyful of this soup once a day with
a biscuit is more than sufficient to maintain
a man in physical strength. The soup will
be consumed 'on the premises'. The
recipients will enter by one avenue and go
out by another. It is confidently expected
that henceforth there will be no more
verdicts of 'Deaths from starvation in
Ireland'."
Comment is needless. The two clergymen
returned to Mallow sad at heart and
ministered to the dying people. The famine-fever
in Mallow was fearful at the time, and
both priests caught the contagion while
attending to their sacred duties. Father
Collins died early in July and a mural
monument in Mallow church indicates
where he is interred. It represents the figure
of Death striking him while administering
the Last Sacraments. He was born in the
town of Clonakilty as was his elder brother,
Michael Collins, who became Bishop of
Cloyne and Ross and died in 1836. He, too,
had been in London in 1824 and 1825,
and the inscription on his monument in
the pro-cathedral, Skibbereen, records how
he vindicated his people before Courts and
Parliaments.
Father Justin McCarthy had a herculean
frame and survived the fever. The late
William O'Brien, M.P., records concerning
Father Justin:-"It is one of my earliest
recollections to see him laid to rest amidst
an outburst of popular grief so awful to
young lives and to young imagination".
He refers to his statue on the opposite wall
to the monument to Father Collins: "There
he is as large as life again, the same shaggy-browed
mountainy man who rushed
between the soldiers shotted guns and his
people in the Tithe affray at Gortroe, who
presided at O'Connell's defence banquet
at Mallow, and a few years afterwards in
his own arms nursed and fed the victims
of the Famine Fever when the speech - making
died away in coffinless graves; there,
again glides the more academic
shade of his brother 'Father John' who
came to be Bishop of Cloyne, and it is
safe to assume, lamented a hundred times
over that the mitre had not descended on
the precipice-like brow of his beloved
Justin."
The Cork Constitution, 23 April, 1850,
publishes (with a great deal of sarcastic
comment) an account of a tenant-right
meeting held on the summit of a mountain
called Knocknaculla, in Tipperary; the
principal speaker was a Father Moloney. He
said : "Between Keeper Hill and Moheraclay
lies one of the most romantic and
picturesque valleys in Europe where some
few years ago lived a thrifty and comfortable
people. Now they are turned adrift on
the world to die on the highway or to perish
more slowly in the poorhouse. The Members
for Tipperary knew this meeting
would be held here today but they did
not come. Mr. Scully dare not take part
because he should be ashamed of his county
cousin and of his family in general. As for
Sir Teddy O'Brien, perhaps some of you
were hurling with him when he was a
barefoot boy on the Ormondes. He is now
a Baronet for making long speeches in
Dublin in favour of the Whigs. He is now
Member for Cashel. Alas poor Cashel! Is
she never to have any Members but place-hunters
and place-beggars? Is it in this
manner gallant Tipperary is to be misrepresented,
laughed at and trampled by those
who represent her in Parliament?'
Amongst the Munster delegates who
attended the meeting held in Dublin to
place this movement on a national basis
were:- the Reverend John Moloney, P.P. ,
Kilcummin, Tipperary; the Reverend
William Mullaly, Donohill; the Reverend
J P. Morris, P.P. , Borrisoleigh; the
Reverend William Keane, P.P., V.G.,
Midleton (later Bishop of Cloyne); the
Reverend James Fitzpatrick, P.P., Castletownroche;
the Reverend Justin McCarthy,
P.P., Mallow. One sinister figure was on
the platform : Mr. William Keogh, M.P.
for the borough of Athlone.
Under the auspices of the parish clergy
meetings in support of the organisation
were held throughout the country. At a
meeting held in Kilmallock, a young Cork
priest spoke and the Constitution of 17
October, 1850, tells its readers how Doctor
Croke, the redoubtable Catholic curate of
Charleville, refuses to join the newly
formed League because he is of opinion
that the present agitation will fail like the
Repeal one did, by carrying certain fraudulent
patriots into Parliament whose only
concern will be to make bargains for
themselves. Last Tuesday at Kilmallock he
said:- "For myself I must in candour confess
to you that however anxious I am to see
tenant-right, I cannot see much hope of
success in the present movement, I wonder
that the example of the past movement for
Repeal has not precluded the possibility
of another delusion. It seems to possess
at least one element of success, the projected
forming of a National Party in Parliament.
But if this is formed, how long will it
endure? Candidates for Parliamentary honours
not long since pledged themselves,
before God and man, to prove true to their
trust, but they shamefully apostatized from
their publicly plighted faith, and betrayed
their people. . . . If the tenant farmers
throughout Ireland would but resolve to
abate the evils of competition for land; if they
would agree among themselves to take no
farm from. which an industrious and honest
neighbour has been evicted; then indeed
you may agitate to some purpose, but
short of this or something similar, your
efforts, my friends, will be unavailing,
your strength fruitlessly expended, your
landlords exasperated, and you yourselves
overtaken by that ruin from which you
attempt to escape . . . . Entertaining these
views I cannot become a member of this
or any similar organisations. Either the
people of this country have political virtue
or they have not. If they have not (and I
believe they have not) let me hear no more
of this agitation for tenant-right. It will
prove unavailing and they who frame it
will one day partake their share of a
merited defeat" .
Father Croke proved a true prophet.
Everybody who has read Irish history
knows how the tenant-right movement of
the fifties, failed, owing to the treachery
of Keogh and Sadleir and their parliamentary
colleagues.
A banquet was given at the Victoria
Hotel, Cork, on the night of Sunday, 10
April, l881. The guest of honour was
Charles Stewart Parnell, M.P., President
of the Irish National Land League. Amid
profound silence a letter was read. It was
written from The Palace, Thurles. The
writer gave as his opinion that Mr. Parnell
was one of the few Irish leaders of whom
it could be said that he originated a great
constitutional struggle and fought it to a
successful issue without bloodshed. He had
brought a nation of slaves to assume the
port, bearing and manner of freemen; and
to fear nothing in defence of their constitutional
liberties, and in protection of their
wives and children. He had forced the
Government to bring in a Land Bill which,
whatever be its merits or demerits, would
never be so much as dreamt of were it
not for the agitation to which he had
given rise. He was proud to see the people
of Cork honouring such a man, and he was
with them that night in heart, soul, and
spirit. The letter was signed T. W .
Croke, Archbishop of Cashel; and at its
conclusion all stood and cheered.
The "redoubtable" young curate of
Charleville had now found a tenant-right
organisation which enunciated the principles
he had outlined thirty years previously. And in the trying years to come he
was a tower of strength to the Land League
and its successor, The Irish National
League.
A priest who was seated by Parnell's side
on that night, Father Eugene Sheehy of
Kilmallock, lived to see the tricolour
floating over the G.P.O. in 1916 and from
the Rotunda corner of O'Connell Street
extended his hand and invoked a blessing
on those who had raised it.
At a meeting of the Political Prisoners
Fund Committee held at Limerick on 19
January, 1882, Mr. P. O'Riordan, T.C.,
presiding, Mr. Stephen O'Mara stated he
had sent on £110 to Dublin. The Reverend
Edward Thomas O'Dwyer, C.C., said he
wished to reply to some statements made
by Judge Fitzgerald at Cork Winter Assizes
concerning himself
At their last meeting he had referred to
the manner in which justice was administered
in Cork. A juror at the Cork Assizes
stated he should be indicted for making
those remarks, and the judge concurred.
He now wished to repeat them. He (Father
O'Dwyer) was present lately at the court
there when Mr. Peter O'Brien, the Crown
Prosecutor, charged a jury who had found
a prisoner "not guilty" with the violation
of their oath. He told them that their
refusal to convict in the evidence he had
put before them, was a miscarriage of
Justice. He said that so as to prejudice the
minds of any Jurymen who were in court
waiting to be called, and to intimidate them
to give the verdict he wished in other
cases which were ready. He (Father
O'Dwyer) was concerned with the next
case called and Mr. O'Brien challenged
forty-three Catholics on that jury-panel.
His language in explaining his reasons was
vindictive. He indicted those Catholics as
being persons who were willing to perjure
themselves. That man should have been
placed in the dock himself for contempt of
court.
There should not be one mode of treatment
for a paid official and another mode
for a priest who has the audacity to stand
up and defend his people. When one
Catholic juror spoke of the insult offered
him. in being ordered to stand aside, Mr.
Peter O'Brien protested and the Judge
ordered the Catholic juror outside the
court. He now saw by the paper where a
Cork juror-one of the privileged class- had
complained of the remarks he made.
This Cork juror has only to swear an
affidavit against himself "Let him now do
it and as far as I can guess it would not
be much trouble to him! He then may have
the satisfaction-and I suppose it is satisfaction
which would be dear to him and
to the other Cromwellian descendants who
are now serving as jurors in Cork,-of
having me present in the dock for contempt
of court. If I have the fortune to be placed
in that dock it will give the death stroke
to this attempted revival by Mr. Peter
O'Brien, and the other Whig officials of
this quasi-Liberal Government of one of
the worst customs of that Protestant
Ascendancy which we all thought was
dead and gone."
Needless to say the challenge was not
taken up. The practice of jury-packing
continued, and in due course its chief
exponent became a judge and received a
title. But all through his life the other
title he had earned, owing to his capacity
to "pack" a jury, clung on to him.
The young curate became Bishop of
Limerick. Thirty-four years later General
Maxwell wrote asking him to admonish
some of his priests whose loyalty to the
Crown was somewhat doubtful. His reply
is written in the pages of Irish history.
It may be added that the Catholic
juryman whom he had seen turned out of
the courthouse in Cork was Mr. Terence
McSwiney, T.C., whose relative and namesake,
in the next generation made the
supreme sacrifice for his country.
The Courthouse, Cork
