IT is difficult to write about the work of
All Hallows' priests in the South Island
of New Zealand. They fitted in so well
as diocesan priests with the Marist missionaries
and all the other Irish priests who
came with them that it is hard to single
them out. This brings to my mind the
advice which the great Father O'Donnell
gave to us students before we left on our
various missions: "Work hard for your
bishop and for your people. Be one with
the priests of your diocese no matter
where they come from. Forget about
All Hallows except in your prayers".
So for those good reasons we have no
reunions, no dinners and no cliques. Yet
clerical hospitality is part of our strong
inheritance. So much so that he is indeed a
strange priest who will stay at a hotel
instead of accepting the welcome home he
will find in any presbytery or monastery in
New Zealand. This we still endeavour to
keep alive, although the tourist trade and
easy transport bring us many visitors.
We have had many outstanding All
Hallows' men among the early pioneer
priests who came to take over from the
French Marist Missioners and to help to
form the diocese of Dunedin in 1870 and
Christchurch in 1887. Among them for
instance, were the two O'Donnells from
Glenroe, County Limerick: James, who was
parish priest of Ashburton for over fifty
years, and John, the saintly parish priest at
Queenstown.
Father John had for his neighbour Father
Hunt of Cromwell. They had a meeting-place
every fortnight in the rugged Crown
Range, riding on horseback the tortuous
fifty miles in order to go to confession.
There is still a peculiar rock known now as
"The Confessional" and pointed out to
tourists, where the two holy priests would
meet and when mind, heart and soul were
refreshed return to their scattered flocks.
Both energetic priests built beautiful
churches, Father Hunt dedicating the one
in Cromwell to "The Irish Martyrs".
Needless to say Cromwell would not
stop the Irish from quickly paying off
the debt.
Dean Bowers of Geraldine and Dean
Church of the Irish Martyrs,
Cromwell , New Zealand
O 'Donnell of Ashburton were great friends
but direct opposites. They would argue but
never fall out. Dean Bowers was a noted
authority on music and often acted as
judge in the band contests for which New
Zealand is noted. Dean O'Donnell was a
theologian, an historian and a lawyer. You
had better keep off such subjects if you did
not want to be ploughed or squashed.
I remember asking the two deans why
they never went back to Ireland. Dean
Bowers, who was never robust, admitted
he could never stand another sea voyage.
And the rugged Dean O'Donnell impressed
me most when he bluntly admitted that
one leaving of Ireland was enough for
him.
Dean Hyland, after bush-ranging on the
west coast, settled in Rangiora where his
name is still revered by the many country
children now in their old age who remember
his fidelity to the weekly catechism
classes. "Murphy", his old horse, would
race the train from Rangiora to Oxford,
over twenty miles.
These were the grand old priests when
I came to the diocese thirty-five years ago.
I am often asked by the young men who
have been coming in greater numbers for
the last ten years how would the old
fellows compare with the fully-equipped,
typewriting, tape-recording priest of today.
Mind you, I've nothing against these
gadgets. I get around such awkward
questions by telling the story of a young
doctor of theology who made bold to ask
his Australian bishop-"Do you think,
my Lord, the students trained abroad are as
good as those trained in Australia?" "Every
bit, doctor, every bit," was the illuminating
if not satisfactory reply.
Father Tom Hanrahan was the first
New Zealander to journey to All Hallows
for his theological course and he will tell
you today that he never regretted his
decision ; he thanks God for the wonderful
experience he had. It is probably due to
his advice that Bishop Joyce intends to send
students from New Zealand to complete
their course at All Hallows. It strengthens
the link and preserves the tradition which
will always bind us together.
Father Matt Fogarty who has retired
owing to failing health in his native
Borrisokane, contributed a great deal to
Ireland's missionary spirit in New Zealand.
There was not a bishop or priest in New
Zealand who did not know "Where is
Geraldine". When visitors were too
numerous for accommodation in the presbytery,
he contrived a “junior house" or
a "Dunboyne" where he made his many
guests comfortable and happy. In Geraldine
he built the most beautiful country parish
church in New Zealand and established
a convent and Catholic school to which he
gave the name of All Hallows.
We, New Zealand-Irish priests, - and
that is our pedigree,-will remain Irish as
long as we live. I remember coming out
through America and joining three All
Hallows' men returning to Victoria. I put
to them one day on board the old R.M.S.
Niagara: "Will I become a colonial when
I settle in New Zealand?". I remember the
combined roar of laughter that met my
sincere question. "Imagine the young fellow
thinking like that". I was upset. So kindly
Father Ward (R.I.P.) settled my mind.
"Father", he said, "if you are an Irishman
at all you will be the more an Irishman the
longer you are in the colonies".
I believe that that is the reason why
we are so welcomed by the clergy and
people when we return to Ireland. "Glory
be to God, childer, where did he get the
brogue?" was the greeting I got on my
first return to Ireland and I wasn't ashamed
of it even though I come from the north.
Talking of the north reminds me to
state that the clergy never dabble in
politics in New Zealand. We vote at
parliamentary and local government elections
Interior, Church of the Irish Martyrs, Cromwell
Church of the Immaculate Conception, Geraldine, New Zealand
but nobody knows how we vote.
Beyond teaching and preaching the
doctrines of true Christian citizenship we
leave party politics severely alone.
Will New Zealand need many more
Irish priests? The bishops are crying out
for them. But we Irish priests would like
to leave a strong and plentiful stock of
New Zealand priests to mark the work
and fruits of our labours. The late Bishop
Brodie, the first New Zealand born
bishop, told me once that he hoped and
prayed that New Zealand would never be
without a flow of the strong, fresh and
lively Irish faith that would come out with
the Irish priests and sisters.
So Father Sheehy's famous peroration
comes to my mind:
"Oh Ireland be it thy high duty
To teach the world the might of moral
beauty
And to stamp God's image truly in the
struggling soul!" -Mangan

