Two names are linked together for all
time in the minds of Irishmen. One
need but be mentioned to evoke the
other, and it is not an unusual thing to find
that on speaking the name of one, the
person spoken about is forsaken for discussion
on the second of the pair. They are
joined to one another not as the towering
ash tree and the ivy that clings to it, if you
get my idea. One is not a giant and the
other a common, ordinary person who
shines with a glory borrowed from his
greater companion. No ! Father Albert and
Father Dominic will be remembered for a
great thing they each did when they stood
by the little groups of their fellow countrymen
on the glorious occasion when they
struck the blow against tyranny that
brought freedom to our people.
There is a danger in this association, for
one might be inclined to think that they
were both alike, exact copies of one another,
men moulding themselves to a certain
pattern as if they foresaw the immortality
that was in store for them, and so prepared
themselves. That would be a false picture.
Father Albert and Father Dominic were,
in their ordinary make-up, totally different
kinds of men. You could go so far as to say
that they were direct opposites. One,
Father Albert, was a gentle, retiring man,
a mystical type; in the thick of the fight,
when the bullets were flying, you could
imagine him hardly knowing that shots
were being fired; he thought of the splendid
ideal that these young men had set
before themselves and he was lost in the
grandeur of that ideal. Father Albert, all
who knew him say, was a dreamer. The
smaller things of life had no place in his
scheme of things. He had the steadfastness
of purpose which is characteristic of all
visionaries. And what an inspiration to the
men between 1916 and 1921 his complete
dedication to their cause was.
God spared Father Albert from living
long in exile. It would have been an agony
for him. His love of homeland was a love of
rare purity. Exile would break his loyal
heart. When death came he consoled himself
with a new pledge of loyalty sent across
the Atlantic to the President. At this
terrible moment, too, he penned a letter to
his brother friars in Ireland, a letter in which
he put before them the ideals and principles
that explained his attitude during the
troubled times, making it quite clear that it
was his duty as priest that led him out into
the grim battle. He could not see the
noblest of the country's manhood go
unassisted to meet their God. He would
spare our people the bitter shame of having
denied her patriots the consolations of their
Faith. Father Albert had vision; he saw what
an evil thing it would be for religion if the
Church disowned in death the patriots
who died that the country might be free.
And for this reason Father Albert deserves
to be remembered by Church and State. He
became an unbloody martyr sacrificing
May they
Rest
In peace
Left:
Father Albert Bibby, O.F.M.Cap., of Kilkenny
Below:
Father Dominic O'Connor, O.F.M.Cap., of
Cork
himself to preserve the Faith of our people.
Father Dominic was a fighting man by
nature, a man of dauntless courage, one
used to the noise of battle for he had served
as chaplain in the first world war. No
dreamer he, though that by no means
suggests that this priest was unfired by the
ideal of freedom that lighted the heart of
the other. Indeed he was a man dedicated as
the other but you could imagine Father
Dominic inspiring men with courage rather
than with that kind of mystical faith which
his brother in religion breathed into the
freedom fighters. Father Dominic was
strong and it is by no means unreason able
to say that his strength was a complement
of the other friar's idealism. A sensitive
nature, such as Father Albert's was, might
have found the unequal struggle against
public opinion and the cautious words of
many something too heavy to bear. Father
Dominic's broad shoulders and fighting
spirit must have proved a God-send to
Father Albert in those perplexing days. It
was Father Dominic, too, who ministered
at the bedside of Terence MacSwiney as
his body wasted and his life ebbed away;
here again providing the solid friendship
and consolation that this other "dreamer of
dreams", MacSwiney, needed. A traditional Irish priest, Father Dominic was in
his role, following in the tradition of
Bishop Ever MacMahon of Ulster, the
gallant unnamed Capuchins who defended
the walls of Limerick against the Cromwellians,
and, of course, " brave Father Murphy"
of'98.
Exile did not prove unbearable for
Father Dominic. He threw the fire and grit
that was his into the work of building the
Church in poorly evangelized parts of the
State of Oregon in the United States. Here
he proved himself a true Capuchin priest.
At his funeral oration in Bend, Oregon,
Bishop McGrath was able to say with
sincerity: " this man was truly a priest" .
Nothing better could be said of him.
For years the voice of the people had
been requesting that the bodies of the two
priests be brought home to rest in the soil of
the land that they loved, and with the
blessing of the ecclesiastical authorities and
the permission of the superiors of the Order,
their repatriation was organised and financed by the men of the Old I.R.A. in the
United States of America and in Ireland.
One is tempted to mention names here but
better judgment dictates that these sincere
men who, nameless, fought for their
country's freedom would prefer to remain
nameless now. In the United States the
bodies were exhumed, flown to New York
and from there to Shannon Airport in
County Clare, where, on a day of brilliant
sunshine, June 13, 1958, they were received
by the Taoiseach, the authorities of the
Order and men of the Old I.R.A., members
of a Clare battalion of them forming a
guard of honour. In the little church at the
airport the chaplain recited the funeral
prayers before the cortege began the inspiring
journey across the south of Ireland to the
little cemetery of the Capuchin Fathers at
Roches town, County Cork.
Through the city of Limerick, on to
Croom and Charleville, Buttevant, Mallow,
to cover the sixty odd miles to Cork, the
funeral moved through streets thronged
with reverent crowds, standing bareheaded,
saying the Rosary aloud or with lips
moving in silent prayer. In each of the
towns the local members of the Old I.R.A .
mounted a guard of honour. And as the
motorcade came to small hamlets or just
cross-roads it was met by knots of people of
all ages prayerfully paying homage as the
bodies of the patriot priests passed by. To
those who remembered, it recalled forcibly
the funerals of the men killed in action
during " the troubled times". At the outskirts
of Cork city, the Lord Mayor and
the Corporation, dressed in ceremonial
robes, were joined by the Lord Mayor of
Dublin and the Mayors of Kilkenny and
Limerick in according the remains a civic
reception. As the funeral passed along the
main streets that evening, the tribute accorded by the great concourse of respectful
citizen brought to mind another great
funeral, that of Terence MacSwiney, nearly
forty years before. The caskets were laid
before the main altar of the Church of the
Most Holy Trinity and, until a late hour,
thousands of people filed past the catafalque
on which they rested. The following
morning, His Excellency the President of
Ireland, the Taoiseach, members of the
Oireachtas, members of various units of
the Old I.R.A. from many parts of the
country, members of the Corporation, the
University College, Cork, many other
representative bodies and a great concourse
of clergy, attended Solemn Requiem. Mass
at which His Lordship the Most Reverend
Doctor Lucey, Bishop of Cork, presided.
After the Mass the funeral formed up for
the short journey to Rochestown, five
miles outside the city. There, together
again in death, these two Capuchin priests
lie with their brethren in the loveliest
little cemetery imaginable. The tinkle of the
Consecration bell sounds over their graves.
Among the tomb-stones you can listen to
the solemn chant of the Divine Office;
daily you see the friars walk in prayer
around the spot that holds the remains of
their departed as they tell their beads for
the souls of the dead. Over all, the Crucifix
is raised, its arms spread out as if in protection.
There we leave Father Albert and
Father Dominic to await in holy, Irish
ground the universal resurrection.
Father Hilary’s Welcome
I nainm Proibhinse na gCapuisineach i nEirinn fearaim fiorchaoin failte roimh choirp ar mbeirte Bhrathar ar dteacht abhaile dhoibh on iasacht. D' oibrigh an bheirt mhac so
Shain Proinnsiais go trean ar son De sa bhaile anso i nEirinn agus i bhfochair a gcomhbhrathar
gCapuisineach i nAmeirice. Taimid buidheach diobh as ucht a ndioghraise.
Is cuis athais duinn cuid de ghaolta na beirte do bheith anso inniu. Se ar nguidhe go
luighidh cre na hEireann go headtrom ar a dtaisi agus go raibh radharc na Trionoide acu i
bhochair Iosa agus Mhuire agus na naomh uile.
In the name of the Irish Capuchin Province I bid a hearty welcome home to the remains
of our two Brethren on their return to the land they loved so well. The Irish Province is
grateful for the noble work they did with the merit of religious obedience at home in Ireland
and among our Irish Capuchin Brethren in the United States.
We extend a very sincere welcome, too, to Father Albert's sister and other relatives,
and to Father Dominic's brother, sister and other kin. For them today's ceremony is at once
a sorrowful and a joyful occasion.
It is my pleasing duty to thank His Excellency President O 'Kelly for gracing our
ceremony with his presence, also the Taoiseach and the Ministers, the civic authorities of
Cork, Dublin and Kilkenny and all the other public representatives whose presence here
we deeply appreciate.
Our special gratitude is due to those who worked for the return of the bodies, in
particular the old I.R.A., but for whose self-sacrificing co-operation today's ceremony
would not have taken place.
While we confidently hope that our two beloved Brethren are already enjoying the
Beatific Vision, yet we pray that God may have mercy on their souls and may Erin's soil
lie lightly on their mortal remains which have travelled so far to rest with their brothers in
Rochestown.
The Taoiseach, Mr. de Valera, with members of the Capuchin Franciscan
Order awaiting the arrival of the remains at Shannon Airport
The caskets being borne from the plane to the Airport church by members of
the Clare old I.R.A., who also form the guard of honour
Father Barry, chaplain to the Airport, recites the prayers of the Church, before the journey
to Cork begins
Some of the Limerick clergy who came to the city boundary to walk in the funeral
as it entered Limerick
Even in villages a g11ard of honour of old I.R.A. was mounted and the people
assembled to pay tribute
Charleville honours the dead priests
Buttevant's veteran I.R.A. men turn out to convey the funeral through the town
Cork's inspiring tribute as the funeral enters Saint Patrick Street
Solemn Requiem Mass at which His Lordship, the Bishop of Cork, presided, was celebrated
at the Capuchins' church before a representative congregation
His Lordship, the Bishop of Cork, blesses the coffins before the last journey
His Excellency the President, and the Taoiseach leave after the Mass
On the morning of the funeral, crowds lined the route along the South Mall and
over Parnell Bridge, Cork
Leaving Cork city ,flanked by a guard of honour from Dublin, members of the First
Cork Brigade walk behind the hearses
An Army guard of honour salutes the remains and droops the colours in respect
Brother friars walk before the remains towards the grounds of Rochestown Monastery
The remains are borne to the grave at Rochestown
Laid to rest in Ireland
The Very Reverend Doctor Hilary, O.F.M.Cap., representing the Very Reverend Father
Provincial, O.F.M.Cap., speaks words of welcome for his brother Capuchins
