Ireland to me is a glorious composition
of people and places that were
fashioned- in Heaven for each other.
Where else could one find such perfect
complexions or such soft, lush pastures? And
those rugged, dark good looks surely blend
to perfection with the strong, boulder
strewn mountainsides. But, thank God,
neither Ireland nor her people are ever
monotonous, ever really predictable; sunshine
turns to rain, while the river, meandering along in beauty, may suddenly become
a thrashing, tumbling torrent, only to run
on again into quiet pools where salmon and
trout linger to delight one.
A full coloured picture will always beat
monochrome for visual excitement; changes
in tempo bring music to life, and half the
fun of a holiday in Ireland lies in wondering
what is around the next corner. We
Englishmen take the trip across the Irish
Sea to find beauty, and amusement
but most of all . . relaxation. To talk of
charm in Ireland is ipso facto to be hackneyed,
but its charm. cannot be ignored; it is
the key that enables the coils of overstrung
nerves to unwind, so that nothing seems to
matter; nothing irritates as it might in other
countries, and everything that happens, or
can happen, is simply a part of being in
Ireland .. . being on holiday, being happy.
This charm is a quality that seeps right
through everything, so that the troubles
of every-day life at home just vanish and
everything seems a pleasant joke. This is a
carefree state of mind, entirely free from
that element of discord which accompanies
laughter at other people, and is largely
responsible for the ability we feel to relax
completely in Ireland.
Books by the score have been written
about Erin's beauties (if they had not been I
would be hard at work now) but what the
eye sees is only half the story. Other
countries have beauty too, but it is possible
to look on them with a leaden heart. Some
of them have gaiety, and kindly humour,
and friendliness to match Ireland's; fishing
that is almost as good . . . or beaches with
as fine sand and warmer water! But still
they do not feel like Ireland. To see Ireland
with eyes alone would be to miss the point
altogether.
It is wonderful to land at Dublin airport,
and to hear those soft voices; to buy a drink
and realise the size of the thing ; to get the
smell of burning turf in the air; to stay at a
hotel that has kept its Georgian character
and courtesy, or to dine at a restaurant that
vies with the best in Europe. It is thrilling
Sylvan scream
Mountain grandeur
to walk down the streets and to gaze at the
fine old silver, and sparkling Waterford
glass displayed in shop windows-or to go
to the library at Trinity College to marvel
at another page in that glorious Book of
Kells. But one does not need to stay in
Dublin to remember the ancient culture of
Ireland; it is everywhere, dotted all over the
country in a wealth of stone relics that give
evidence of a really industrious past. The
dry stone walling, too, impresses tremendously
and the thought of the work,
perseverance and unity of purpose it has
represented through the ages strikes me as
somewhat symbolic.
Ireland has the potential to be the
greatest dairy farming country in Europe,
but farming needs cohesion, and continual
hard work. Troubles that diverted men's
thoughts and divided their time in the past
prevented any co-ordinated effort then, and
so led to a poverty, and subsequent dwindling
of population, that nukes real prosperity
much harder to achieve now. But really
good times could come about if Irishmen
were to look to the future once more, and
develop their country fully as an efficient
farming community.
The dwindling population of Ireland
makes for one of the few notes of sadness in
the country. Ruins from Cromwell's day
are common enough at home, and far
enough away in time to mean nothing, but
the modern ruins are another matter. Here
and there along the roadside, or tucked into
the fold of a hill, one sees an abandoned
house, and thinks perhaps of lonely people
moving to a more settled area, in a world
that no longer likes its own company. But
to see whole villages just rotting away is
Islanded lakes
different. Were they once thriving communities,
making a living, until it closed,
from the nearby copper, or silver mine?
Or were they always struggling until the
year came, when they just packed up and
went away? It makes one think.
But one cannot be sad in Ireland for long,
and her lack of population is also one of our
greatest joys. Where else on earth could
one have a whole, beautiful sandy cove to
oneself, on a hot summer's day? To be able
to shout at the waves, and romp with the
children with unrestricted enthusiasm; to
lie in the sun, and sleep or talk, or read
without anyone looking over your shoulder;
to walk for miles and miles amidst the
most staggering beauty, and to see no other
tripper-to hear the blare from no one's
wireless, and to be invited into no garish
amusement arcade; these blessings you
enjoy in Ireland. That is Ireland, and to me,
only Ireland. Once, out in the hills, I came
across an old woman, living alone. I was
hot, and a little out of breath, looking
forward to another dip in the ice-cold sea,
when I returned to my family. Her face
was wrinkled and drawn with pain from
arthritis, but it opened up in a welcoming
smile .... "It's tired you are ... would you
like a cup of tea in your hand now?"
People in more thickly populated countries
have lost the meaning of true hospitality
like that.
It is a joy most motorists have never
encountered to drive on the good, uncluttered
main roads of Ireland, speeding, or
ambling at will, or to saunter down some
little lane, wondering where it will lead,
knowing only that it will be beautiful. It
is lovely to keep the children amused
counting donkeys, or horses, as they travel
the road, and to know there are plenty of
each for good competition. And it is
wonderful to arrive. To halt or stay in a
village that has no television, where the
people are friendly, and the talk is stimulating.
There is no question of being an outsider
when you enter the village pub. There is no
thought of being lonely in the little hotel.
People will talk, there is nothing else to do,
so they get to know each other, and new
links are forged in a world that needs
friendliness between all peoples. Or perhaps
a priest will be one of the guests, and will
organise the sort of entertainment that is
never seen at home now-where everyone
performs their party piece, and joins in
singing together between "acts".
Then there is the bonhomie of the village
street where even the dogs are friendly, and
only tourist coaches can spoil the feeling
that everyone, even us, the visitors, belong
there.
"Good morning, Eamonn. What sort of
day will it be?’
"Sure, it'll be fine".
"Hot enough for swimming, or perhaps
better for fishing"?
"Sure it will be hot enough for swimming
-or perhaps it will be cool enough for
fishing!" He-any of them, are so anxious
to please that we have to use our own
inexperienced judgment, and plan our day
accordingly.
But that is just part of being in Ireland.
Part of being amused, and charmed, and
utterly relaxed. It is just one of the hundreds
of reasons why we hate to go; why we say
to everyone we see as we leave--"We will
be back," knowing that it is no empty
phrase, but a real must for us.
