The Old Bog Road, written half a
century ago, is still a well-known
Irish song. Strangely enough its
author's name has not shared the same
limelight. Perhaps Teresa Brayton would
have preferred it so, for she was a gentle,
retiring person; what could better illustrate
her humility than the popularity of her
song to-day, contrasted with her own
modest estimate of her work. Fifty years
ago she also wrote:-
I know that my simple singing will fade
from your ears as soon
As the song of a wayside robin you heard
by the way in June:
But the dreams I have dreamed for Ireland,
please God, they will never die . ...
Over and above her poetry, her outstanding
patriotism gives her further claim.
to be remembered. Both were, indeed,
inseparable, nearly all her poetry being
inspired by her deep love of her country
and her people.
She wrote hundreds of poems, many of
which have been adjudged superior to
The Old Bog Road. But the notable and
distinguished thing about her writing is
its close adherence to the old bardic
traditions. Scarcely any other Anglo-Irish
poet has recalled so vividly the old world of
Gaeldom; of Gaelic poets who voiced the
irrepressible Faith of their people, or
struck out battle cries for their armies, or
gave to their exiles' loneliness the heartease
of song. Not one, but all of these things,
she herself has done - in our own times.
Yet in recent years she had suffered a
neglect that had almost hidden her name
and work from the rising generation.
This recent neglect, it must be said at
once, was due solely to the unavailability
of her writings here, and not to any apathy
in the people for whom she wrote, nor
to any demerit in her writing. Indeed
poetry closer to the hearts of the people
than hers it would be difficult to conceive.
It might be the example par excellence in
modern times of the writing which lives
by Irish suffrage, the type described by
Professor Daniel Corkery in one of his
penetrating works of criticism as the
"literature, which unknown to the outside
world, finds shelter and affection in Irish
homes." Of her books published in New
York over thirty years ago, the occasional
copy which found its way here is, indeed,
closely treasured. It was through fortunately
seeing one of them recently that Padraig
McQuillan of Enfield first came to know
her poetry, and resolved that so worthy a
writer and so great a patriot should not be
without public tribute. Within five months,
his plan, warmly supported by the other
members of the Enfield Muintir na Tire
Guild and backed by subscriptions from
friends of Teresa Brayton all over the
world, came to fruition with the erection
of a Celtic Memorial Cross at her grave in
Cloncurry cemetery in north Kildare. It
was unveiled by President Eamon de
Valera on 18 October, 1959. In spite of
continuous heavy rain, crowds of people
from far and near thronged the cemetery
for the unveiling ceremony.
Cloncurry, or Cluain Conaire (Conaire's
Meadow) as it was once known, is a quiet
townland two miles east of Enfield on the
Dublin-Sligo road. There is a well-known
landmark there - an ancient hill-fort,
topped by a tree growing in the exact
centre of it. This fort stands on one of the
most storied fields in Ireland, worthy
ground indeed for Teresa Brayton's last
resting place, for history tells us that it was
once the meeting place of kings and princes,
that there another poet of the Gaels died
more than eight hundred years ago, that
monks and friars sanctified Cluain Conaire
from the days of Saint Patrick.
Of the other poet who died there historical
records, reduced by the pillage of
centuries, tell us little. But that he was of
high rank is clear from the Annals of
Clonmacnoise which records his death in A.D.
1137, "Moyleisa, called Crossan Fyn
O'King, Chief Poet of Ireland in that type
of Irish verse called Crossanaght, died at
Cloncorrie in Lynster." The monastery, the
ruins of which can still be seen, dates from
these medieval times when Carmelites and
The ancient hill fort at Cluain Conaire
Augustinians had settlements there. Teresa
Brayton is buried close to its south wall,
the great doorway which on a long gone
day may have opened in welcome to
Moyleisa, now leading to her grave.
She was born in the adjoining townland
of Kilbrook on 29 June, 1868, the fifth of
a family of three boys and three girls. Her
father was Hugh Boylan and her mother
Elizabeth Downes. Their farmhouse, now
gone, was near the roadside, about three
hundred yards east of Cloncurry cemetery.
Before emigrating, at the age of twenty, to
the U.S., she had been assistant-teacher to
her sister, Elizabeth, in the local national
school at Newtown, and her stirring poems
in the Irish national and provincial press
had attracted wide attention in these Land
League days. She then wrote over the
pen-name, T. B. Kilbrook. In Boston,
Chicago, and later in New York, she
continued to write, and contributed to
scores of American papers and journals.
In New York she met and married
Richard Brayton, a French-Canadian, an
executive in the Municipal Revenue
Department, and their marriage was a
happy one. Along with looking after their
home, she continued her career as a freelance
journalist, writing mostly for The
Irish World, in which her articles and poems
became a regular feature, and also contributing
poems to the New York Monitor,
Syracuse Sun, Boston Pilot, San Francisco
Monitor, Rosary Magazine, and many other
publications. Her poetry, vividly expressing
the exile's longing for home, soon won her
the affection of every Irish heart, and a
place of honour in Irish-American circles
in New York.
She was welcomed into the ranks of The
Celtic Fellowship, a society which was
composed of people who had been successful
in theatrical, musical, artistic and
journalistic fields, and included many
luminaries of the various professions. Every
Saturday night, after the final curtain was
rung down on Broadway stages, an
impromptu concert was given in The Celtic
Fellowship clubrooms in Greenwich village.
Teresa Brayton was a frequent contributor
to these functions, where her reciting of her
latest poems was always regarded as a highlight
of the programme.
During her visits home to Ireland, she
became the close friend of the Easter Week
leaders, and, back in America, threw all
her energies into the Irish Cause, raising
funds, distributing pamphlets, and writing
her fervent nationalism into poems that
were hailed as "the battle cries of the last
struggle of the Gael." After her husband's
death, she returned to Ireland for good in
1932, and lived for a time with a sister in
Bray, and later at Waterloo Avenue,
North Strand. In 1941 she returned to her
old home in Kilbrook, to die there two
years later, on 19 August, 1943, in the same
room in which she was born. 
Thus ended a life-span of seventy-five
years, so rich in good works, and rounded
out at last with the exile's wish of bas i
n-Eirinn. Even its bare outline, inadequately
set down, cannot help but reveal some of
valorous spirit and lovable nature.
How much more her poems reveal!
Even a selection of them show her to be
the rich inheritor of great traditions
extending back to the golden age of
Cluain Conaire, back even to the ancient
hill-fort that overlooks her grave.
The opening lines in her first book of
poems give a clue to her sincerity, her
whole-heartedness. But they indicate even
more. In exile she inscribes her book thus:
Unto my own, the Irish, I send with
smiles and tears
This little book of melodies caught from
the flying years;
With all the love within me and all the
best I know
I'd call them back o'er many a track to
lands of long ago.
The echo here of Ceitinn' s poem, Beir
beannacht leat a sgribhinn, is no accident. The
more closely her poems are examined the
better one sees that their roots go deep into
the Gaelic bardic traditions. Little wonder,
then, that, as do the Gaelic poets, she
expresses time and again the immemorial
forces which have shaped the Gael.
Of these forces, one of the strongest was
nationalism, - normally no shaper of great
poetry. Irish nationalism through ages of
persecution became a burning inspiration
to every Gaelic poet for over a thousand
years. In some corners of a sophisticated
age, it has become fashionable to speak of
it as being no different from any other
country's nationalism; to say that it is
being romanticised, over-drawn; but one
need only return to Professor Corkery' s
clear-sighted analysis of Irish life and
literature to find it described as something
which normal countries, unused to ages of
near-enslavement, can hardly hope to understand
- "one of the deepest things in Irish
life, searching into the souls of men,
drawing sanction, as it does, from hundreds
of battlefields, slaughterings, famines, exoduses,
as well as from hundreds of heroic
lives and the piety of verse." So, Corkery.
Clearly, then, its expression in Anglo-Irish
verse calls for passionate words, for vehement
speech-not less vehement, surely,
than this typical passage from Teresa
Brayton:
Irreconcilables! Thank God
For freedom's sacramental wine
That made on Aughrim's reeking sod
Our father's death a draught divine.
That set a smile on Tone's dead lip,
Peace on the brows of the young
Shears
She has a particular reason for this
passionate memory of the l798 heroes. Did
not her own great-grandfather lead the
north Kildare men in some of the most
gallant, guerilla fighting of the whole
campaign. Ireland's history, even its prehistory,
its mythology, she had made her
special study, but what held her most was
the dreadful, and near-glorious, chapter of
'98 - the long awaited Irish-French victory
foiled by ill-fortune, and turned into rout
and destruction - the honourable surrender
terms for the French soldiers - the poorly
equipped Irish abandoned, hacked down in
pursuit, but turning again to storm the
English guns in a last surfeit of courage.
Most of all she recalls her own ancestor
leading his gallant band of pikesmen south
to Prosperous to give battle to Rodin's
yeos - the same yeos who, a week earlier,
had treacherously slain the surrendered
insurgents of the Curragh district, leaving
"four hundred murdered bodies on Saint
Brigid's grassy plain." Their lost battle,
their ended lives, weigh heavy on her
heart. But their courage is part of her
world too, part even of her blood. Small
wonder if, four generations later, the steel
of their brave, outnumbered pikes still
sings in her lines. In her 1916 poem, Ireland
Speaks, she writes:-
I am no beggar at your gate,
No suppliant for your mercy, I;
Time looms insistent with my fate,
I live or freedom's self must die.
Down immemorial years I've trod;
I looked on Time when Time was young,
I taught to you the word of God
When language halted on your tongue.
"The Celt is gone and Ireland dead!"
So mocked ye in my hour of need.
Victors to-day my children tread
Upon the dust of Cromwell's seed.
Beyond the farthest ocean's sweep
Where once my kith and kin ye hurled,
They and their children's children keep
My living rampart round the world.
I stand before your loaded guns,
Your bayonets press against my breast;
Strike if you dare! my soldier sons,
And God's strong hand will do the rest.
My banner flaunts down every wind,
It holds no serf, it knows no crown;
'Tis freedom's call to all mankind,
And who shall dare to drag it down?
It is the poetry of the active participant,
not of the literati who were above the battle.
One can see in her the Gaelic file reborn
again - an Aodhagan O Rathaille nerving
and guiding his people, or a Piaras Feiriter
urging on his troops - using, too, the
same methods that they used, the proud
declamation of ancestral feats, the calling
up of past glories - a tradition that has its
origin in the old sagas where Diarmuid and
Oscar and Caoilte prepared for combat
by recalling the great battle-deeds of their
ancestors. It was in that old tradition that
her rousing poem, so important to the
result of the 1920 plebiscite, was written:-
Roll back the portals of silence. Summon
her dead men forth
From Munster and Connacht and Leinster
and the proud dark hills of the north!
Blare to the breezes of morning a reveille,
wild and free,
To waken her slumbering Wild Geese
wherever their ashes be.
From the restless torrent of every sea where
Irish bones bleach white
Call ye her dead ere a word is said in
Ireland's plebiscite. ...
Of the festering famine pits where
coffinless bones were flung,
From quicklime's flame and scaffold's shame
let them speak with ye tongue for tongue,
Bearers of battle-axe, pike or gun waging
her centuried fight,
Bugle them back past star and sun to speak
in your plebiscite . ...
In other poems she calls up the great
names separately- Casement – Parnell - Sarsfield
- Emmet; and the numbers of
people, at home and abroad, she thus
rallied to the cause of Irish independence
must remain incalculable. Before the eyes
of a new generation the film, Mise Eire,
has unfolded some of the splendour of those
years, some glimpses of the patriots; and
many have recounted as one of the film's
most stirring moments the sight of the
people filing past the coffin of O'Donovan
Rossa lying in state, and then the sudden
glimpse of his noble chieftain-like countenance.
Teresa Brayton had watched that
majestic homecoming which was to end
with Pearse' s memorable oration, and has
spoken words which will doubtless be
remembered too:-
'Twas blue and gold the Hudson ran,
The harbour tides swung full and free
When the dead patriot began
His last, long journey oversea.
Columbia bared her brows to him,
The best she breeds gave honour then
When, out beyond the ocean's rim,
Rossa sailed Erinward again.
The seas were green, the seas were grey,
The thunderous waves went shouting past,
Till over night and over day
His dead heart won to her at last.
And reverent hands in Dublin Town
Bore that dear dust no tears might stir
And, with his brothers, laid him down
In her high place of sepulchre.
With muffled drum and wailing fife
And guns at rest they closed the sod
Where he, who'd lived for Ireland's life,
Lay, sealed in silence unto God.
But, as the pregnant seed of spring
Thrills to a harvest yet to be,
So Rossa waits the burgeoning
Of valour unto liberty.
Not only her poetry, but her whole way
of life, her newspaper articles, even her
personal letters are instinct with this deep
love of country. This is an extract from a
letter she wrote to one of her friends,
Michael Walsh, some years after the Rising.
She was then home on one of her visits
from the United States.
“I was permitted to visit Pearse' s grave
in the quicklime pit which was prepared for
150 in 1916. There are fourteen buried
there now. The grave is well-kept. I was
not permitted to enter Mountjoy, however.
Enclosed is a leaf from Robert Emmet's
vine in Saint Enda's where I spent a day
with Mrs. Pearse. There is a curious story
about this vine. It was planted by Robert
Emmet originally but the old root from
which present growth sprang has long been
mouldered almost to dust, quite dead apparently.
Now, from this old rotten wood,
leafless for years, a vigorous growth started
right after Pearse's death. After the deaths
of Rory O'Connor and Cathal Brugha in
'22 another shoot came, the two growing
side by side and bearing fruit. This leaf is
from that vine.
The block on which Emmet was beheaded
is also in Saint Enda' s, the mark of the
headsman's axe still showing dark where
the blood flowed. The ivy leaf is from
Tone's grave in Bodenstown."
In the clamour of Broadway, it was on
such scenes her mind rested, such
mementoes she cherished. Around her neck,
on a little chain, she wore a piece of the
flagstaff which flew the Irish flag on the
G.P.O. on Easter Monday, 1916, - a
memento which had been presented to her
by the late Countess Markievicz.
When the battles were over, she wrote
of the pride and sorrow of mothers
remembering their lost sons:-
'Twas Maura O’ Kelly from Galway
Walked down the hill with me;
Proud was her head for her two sons, dead
And buried in Killalea...
- a poem that ends with lines as intense as
those of any Gaelic poet:-
I said "Oh, woman of Galway!
The toll of death is long."
Said she, "They died with their heads in pride
And on their lips a song.
And the lads I've buried in Killalea
With blood upon hand and face
Are a bond between their God and me
That He will redeem the race."
The Celtic Cross erected over the grave of Teresa Brayton
in the churchyard of Cluain Conaire, and unveiled by His
Excellency, Eamon de Valera, President of Ireland.
While the intensity of her patriotic
poems marks her out as one of the most
Gaelic- minded of the Anglo-Irish poets, it
is in her personal poems that the spirit of
high poetry is manifest. The heart-break of
exile, so much a part of her own life,
inspired some of her most poignant writing.
Even this more travelled age cannot come
to regard that age-old sorrow, the parting
and grief of deoraidheacht, as an exaggerated
theme in Gaelic literature. To do so would
be to forget how many of those partings
had then the finality of death, to forget
the anguish of her lines :-"My mother
died last Springtime when Ireland's fields were
green." To show the obverse side of the
tragic story - the mother sorrowing
for her exiled children - she wrote a much
greater poem than The Old Bog Road. It
is the estimate of discerning critics that
few poems have probed the race consciousness
so deeply. To make it the true heart-cry
that it is, she uses the homely accents
of the country, "the echoed music of a
Gaelic speech winning back to its own
again," and the heart- cry breaks (as heart
cries have ever done) into phrases of
Biblical immediacy and beauty. It is, of
course, the lament of countless Irish
mothers:-
When daylight fades from the cabin floor
And night winds stir in the big ash tree,
'Tis meself sits lonesome beside the door,
Missin' the childher that's gone from me.
Matt and Mary and Patsy and Mike,
My three sthrong boys and my girleen dear;
Sure, 'tis only a few short days be like
Since I saw them playing around me here.
Kind and dacint and aisy to rear,
The bate of my childher was not on earth;
And the only sorrow they made me bear
Was an empty house and a silent hearth.
But sure with so many to clothe and keep,
And nothin' behind when rent was due,
I made no moan when they crossed the deep,
But God and His Mother - They knew,
They knew.
My Mary's a servant in Boston town,
And Mike and Matt are away out West;
While Patsy, the rover, sthrays up and down,
Wherever the foot of him likes it best.
But never a wan of them fails to write
With the monthly money and news go leor;
But, och, 'tisn't money I want to-night,
But my four fine childher about the door.
Mary keeps saying, "In spring, plase God,
I'll be landin' back to you safe and sound;
For nowhere is good as the good old sod,
And no one like you in the four seas round.
Sure, I'm cravin' a whiff of turf fire smoke,
And a sight of my mother so snug and sweet,
In her white-frilled cap and her big blue cloak,
That bate all the fashions in Boston Shtreet."
O, Mary, my girleen, never at all
Do I be spakin' of pain or ache;
But at night when the corncrakes call and call
My heart goes wild for my darlins' sake.
When shadows lie on the lonesome floor,
And night winds stir in the big ash tree,
Then I sit by meself at the open door,
And cry for the childher that's gone from
me.
Of her many poems this must have been
her favourite, for it was the one she usually
chose when asked to recite. How it was
received by her fireside audience in Kilbrook
or Cloncurry is not difficult to
imagine, for the words, handed down
orally, are still to be found on the lips of
the people there.
Nothing, however, so surely identifies
her with the Gaelic poets of the past as
another poem which might have come
out of the heart of Gaeldom. That Gaelic
civilisation, that deep love of learning;
which the most keen-minded analysis has
proved to have had "no equal in the world
of literature" grew up, as we know, around
the bardic schools. When it was rooted up,
broken, as good as slain, its poets still
remained its faithful custodians, even when
reduced to the most extreme poverty, like
Teresa Brayton soon after her return to Ireland
Raftery, "tapping beggar-like along the
stony roads of the West". In this condition
they were the living symbols of their
country, impoverished during the blackest
night in our nation's history, but still
keeping alive the inner light of Faith and
learning. Because of what they did and
because racial memories are long, all poor
wayfarers resembling them have still a
warm place in the people's hearts. Across
two thousand miles of sea and in the toils
of a foreign city, Teresa Brayton remembered some such figure tapping along
the roads of Kilbrook and to him she gives
words that might be those of Raftery
himself:-
I am Owney, the fiddler, 
Owney, blind and alone,
The lovin’ of wife and children,
I never can call my own;
But there isn’t a read in Ireland
Or a boreen but I’ve trod,
Owney, the poor old fiddler,
Who soon will be gone to God.

I walk with never a stumble
Where many with sight go slow,
For I have a light within me
That only "the dark" can know.
The sun and moon and stars are my friends,
The rain on my face is sweet,
And where is there finer flooring
Than the grass under Owney's feet?
When I hear the birds in the bushes
I'm seein' them, every one;
The wren like a fine soft April day,
The lark like a risin' sun;
There's the blackbird, mellow as moonrise,
The thrush like a wooin' lover;
But the robin is sweet as rest to my feet
When a long, hard day is over.
I am Owney, the fiddler,
Who never had eyes to see,
But the great high spirits of Erin
Have whispered my tunes to me;
And whether it was in mornin'
Or duskin' you heard me play,
You'll think of Owney, the fiddler,
Over half of a world away.
Or, perhaps, it is not so much Raftery
who lives in these lines, as that other poet of
the hungry heart, the great MacCuarta,
who listened in some far-off summer to the
birds he could never see again, and fashioned
for us, out of his blindness, the undying
light of a lovely poem. That love of nature,
which inspired the best lyrics of the Gaelic
poets, is all through her work, in lines that
capture the natural beauty of hill and
stream, and capture, too, some subtle
spirit of beauty beyond them, as when a
recent poet, strong in the same tradition,
writes of "the undying difference in the
corner of a field", giving words to something
we had thought to be beyond words.
Could there be a more evocative description
of the delicate cloud-textures, peculiar to
Irish skies than these words which she gives
to some exiled Irishman remembering
home?
Sometime I shall leave the city
Where the best in a man soon dies,
And seek for the tender pity
That broods in my native skies.
- or a fresher, more homely, description
of the golden promise of spring days than
these four lines from another poem?
When Spring with her dewy fingers
Sets bowers along the hills,
And a promise of lark-song lingers
In the hearts of the daffodils.
But these descriptions of nature, lovely
as they are, were only the trappings to what
she knew her fellow exiles remember
most - the familiar sights and sounds of
hearth and field, the welcome of neighbours,
all the homely delights which
another poet, centuries before, had woven
into the imperishable music of Ban Cnuic
Eireann Oigh. Their constant preoccupation
with the memories of home she expresses
in lines that tell their longing:-
For the old thatched home of my father,
the turf fires warm and bright,
The pleasant song and the story where
neighbours dropped in at night,
The wild bogs purple with heather, the
ring of the cross-roads' set
For dancing on summer evenings to tunes
that I can't forget.
How eagerly her readers must have
scanned the pages of The Irish World and
the other Irish-American papers for lines
like these, which were as a fresh breath of
home. As if to satisfy their need, she worked
unsparingly, going so far as to make poems
for the exiled of almost every county and
town in Ireland, and often working late
into the night when her own day's work
was done.
For what is the city's luring,
The calling of street and mart,
When a wind from the hills of Wicklow
Is blowing across your heart!
are the lines he gives to a Wicklow man.
Hilaire Belloc, yearning for the downs of
Sussex, has hardly sounded a sweeter
chord than:-
And so from the weary toiling
Of many an ill-starred road
I will go where the hills of Wicklow
Are blowing their peace abroad,
For over the seas I'm seeing
A sugawn chair by the fire
At home in my father's country,
The land of my heart's desire.
It is not surprising that when she finally
decided to come home for good in 1931,
her exiles were strangely perplexed; their
grief at losing her, struggling with their
joy that her own exile was ended. A fund
organised for a farewell party to her was
over-subscribed almost as soon as it was
opened, and so grateful and affectionate
were the letters that poured in, that the
organisers decided to bind them into a
testimonial book, which they presented to
her. It was her proudest moment. This
tribute of her people's love for her expressed
in the letters quite overwhelmed her. She
prized the book over all her possessions.
It is now treasured by her relatives in
Kilcock, and makes moving reading; the
letters came from celebrities like John
Count MacCormack, from priests, doctors,
teachers, newspaper editors, and from
the humblest workers of field and factory
and building-site. Seldom can a writer have
had such an overwhelming proof of her
place in the hearts of all. This extract from
one of the letters (that of Thomas J. Ford,
editor of The Irish World) may be taken as
typical of the many tributes:-"Her poetry
has gone around the world. It has served
to hearten, uplift and inspire countless
thousands of the scattered children of the
Gael."
All this long-deserved praise she received
with humility. Indeed, her new-found
fame was something she never got quite
used to, and it is remembered that, on the
day of her return home, she was greatly
surprised when, on turning on the radio,
she heard Seamus O'Doherty singing one
of her own songs.
Her days of retirement were spent
quietly. But on one occasion, while living
in Clontarf, and then almost seventy years
old, she was prevailed upon to recite some of
her rousing poems at an Easter Week
Commemoration Concert. She received a
tremendous ovation. This is a description
of her given then:- "She was small,
dressed in black, and her hair was snow-white.
Reserved in manner, she would talk
on anything but herself and her career.
Her eyes were large and showed a sparkling
intelligence; her mouth was firm but
humorous.''
One of her close friends, William Walsh
of the Ben of Fore, County Westmeath,
has also recorded his impressions of her:"
I found Teresa Brayton shy and reserved
when in a crowded room. She was at home
only with those who shared her interests,
but if one were interested in poetry or the
arts she asked no more.
"She had a richly-stored mind and was
'never less alone than when alone'. She
had a wonderful memory for poetry, and
could recite countless poems by heart in
her rich, resonant voice; and many a
winter's night I sat enthralled listening to
her at her cosy fireside in her little flat in
Dublin."
On a visit to her later in Kilbrook, in the ·
Autumn of 1941, he took what must be one
of the last photographs of her, as she stood
outside her rose-covered house. "She loved
flowers," he writes, "and her home in
Kilbrook was a bower of roses in Summer".
Though now in failing health, she still
bravely displayed her usual cheerfulness and
good humour, and he remembers his last
sight of her, "her bobbed, silver hair
framing a calm face, the most striking
features of which were her bright, alert,
blue eyes."
That quality of humour, as true a
touchstone of Gaelic poetry as any, finds
its way into her writings too (as it did
into Eoghan Ruadh's and all the others,
even in their darkest days). She describes,
for instance, an everyday happening in the
country - the villagers, gathered together
in the evening, discussing the news of the
day. These are the opening verses of the
ballad:
By the crossroads of Knockallen where the
bog and upland meet,
There's a tidy row of houses that the
neighbours call "the street";
It is free and independent, though it pays
its tax to George,
For it runs its own Home Parliament in
Jerry Connor's forge.
In the quiet dusk of evening, when the
iron hammer rings,
That mighty song of labour that has raised
and routed kings,
The members take their places, with their
backs against the wall,
And who but Jerry Connor should be
leader of them all.
For the tangles of Westminster there's
little patience there,
Where state affairs are settled in the shoeing
of a mare;
And bills that Whig and Tory view with
sinking of the heart
Are fixed while Jerry rims the wheel of
Kelly's donkey cart.
' Tis there the Kaiser's law is scorned, the
Czar is roundly cursed,
And every ruling head declared no better
than the worst,
When the world around, from China to the
Rockies' farthest gorge,
Is tried before the Parliament in Jerry
Connor's Jorge.
Many of her ballads and poems in the
same happy strain became favourite recitation
pieces in the New York of her day,
this lighter side of her work providing as
richly humorous a commentary on Irish
life as Around the Boree Log did on the life
of the Australian out-back.
In all the work of her many-sided genius,
in poems of humour, sorrow, patriotism,
exile, the emotional content is always right,
and always full square in the Gaelic tradition.
With this, one feels, she would have
been content. It was all she set out to do.
But even in the criticism of a new age
which tends to put form before content,
her work can stand up well before the
higher-criticism of the perfectionists, its
form at times matching that of the best
writers. Of form in Anglo-Irish poetry
(or in that part of Anglo-Irish poetry,
which lives by Irish suffrage - which is
the part that matters) the master moulds
have long been acknowledged to be those
of Padraic Colum, who performed the
unique linguistic marvel (to which some
worthy critical pen may yet do justice)
of bending and shaping a foreign language
to his purpose until the words breathed
through them the very soul and spirit of
the Gaelic world; breathed them as naturally
and easily as if it were not English words
he used at all, but Gaelic. He has related
how one of his poems was inspired by his
hearing an old Roscommon man, in
describing the depopulation wrought by
the famine, suddenly and unconsciously
throw out a phrase as rhythmic as a piece of
poetry:- "I might have stood in Connacht,
on the top of Cruckmaelinn, And all
around me I would see the hundreds of my
kin. " 
Many of Teresa Brayton's poems are as
dose-linked as that to the rhythmic speech
of the people. To take an example: in one
poem a poor woman tells of her once
idyllic life in Glenashee (the poem's title),
her happiness there with husband and
family until some tragedy struck, leaving
her no life to lead but that of a poor woman
of the roads. And the lines, like those of
the Roscommon man, might have been
taken down from the speaker's lips, so
true do they ring:-
But what's the use of talkin' now; they're
gone beyond my call,
My fine, strong man, my childher three,
my house and cow and all.
I'm but a wanderin' woman now and what
you give to me
Is like the many a bite and sup I gave in
Glenashee.
It was not an inexpert poet who could
recognise this everyday speech for the
poetic coin that it is. But form, as has
been said, was not her main concern;
her largeness of heart gave her to know that
content must always come first.
The deep love of humanity, so much a
part of her nature, is seen most clearly in a
poem so personal to her that one could not
imagine its being written by anyone else.
There is a two-fold commiseration involved
- the heart of a priest going out to the
poorest of his flock, and her heart in turn
going out to him for his kind action. This
is her own account of the subject matter:-
One of the noblest monuments to humanity,
in my humble opinion, is the Celtic Cross
which Father Tim Dempsey of Saint
Louis has placed in Calvary Cemetery,
there on the plot which he purchased for
the friendless poor who so may rest peacefully
untroubled by the earth of a "Potter's Field."
Forty -seven wandering sons of the Gael are
sleeping there to-day.
Father Tim died on April 6th, 1936, and
all America mourned his passing. Even
death did not separate him from his poor
people, for he was laid to rest in the plot
which he purchased for the poor - "The
Exiles' Rest."
Here is the poem she was then moved to
write:-
From roads that were dark and dreary,
From ways that were walked in vain,
From toils that had long grown weary,
From scourgings of sun and rain;
From the lonesome path of the friendless
That leadeth to no man's breast,
They have found the peace that is endless
Asleep in the "Exiles' Rest."
Who knows of the wistful yearnings
They carried through street and mart,
The dreams that their cheerless mornings
Hid in the dark of their heart?
Who knows of their soul's high hoping
To stand and shine with the best?
Alas, for their fruitless groping,
They lie in the "Exiles' Rest."
Who knows of the inward vision
The pictures mystic and sweet
That blessed them from lands Elysian
And healed the fret of their feet?
Who knows how across the billows
Wind- scattered and all astir
The old sod haunted their pillows
And they lived in their dreams with her:
So the God of their ceaseless praying,
The God whom they ne'er denied,
Made out of their deaths a Maying
With an Irish soggarth beside.
Nor altar, nor Jane, nor steeple
He raised at his Lord's behest,
But he gave a grave to his people
And called it the "Exiles' Rest."
He gave them their crown of living,
The guerdon they craved for most
An Irish priest for their shriving
And peace at the utmost post.
A grave where the public finger
Of charity writes no crest,
But ever the angels linger
To hallow the "Exiles' Rest."
And so with the stars for keepers
The dawns and the midnights go,
'Tis little the worn-out sleepers
Are caring who rest below.
And though the road through the shadows
Still leads to an empty quest,
The Cross of their country hallows
Their sleep in the "Exiles' Rest."
God bless you, O Irish soggarth
God keep you in shine and gloom
For sake of the homeless Saviour
Who lay in a stranger's tomb.
For your love like His outreaching
Draws the friendless home to your breast,
And you gave them for noblest preaching
His peace in your "Exiles' Rest."
Who can doubt that the writer of these
lines possessed that greatness of heart which
Goethe has set down to be the clearest
mark of the true poet?
It is the quality that distinguishes all her
writing, giving her kinship with the old
Gaelic poets, whose amhrans, born of the
heart and spirit, found their way into the
people's hearts, and still live on their lips
wherever Gaelicism survives. Despite her
having to use an alien language, she can
be seen to be one in the same tradition,
following closely in their footsteps, aware
of their role, and hers, in handing on the
old traditions, as these lines from one of
her early poems reveal:-
Oh, Isle of mine, where the ancient glories
Of ages linger by hill and dell,
The harper's song and the Druid stories,
The old traditions that poets tell!
How faithfully she sought to preserve
the old traditions is now part of our history.
In her writing, she is the great-hearted
interpreter of the forces in her people's
lives, their nationalism, their humour, their
exiles' love of home. Of the other strong
force in Irish life - the religious consciousness
of the people - we can say that it
informs and lights all her work.
Christmas Verses, a booklet of seven of
her religious poems, has the quality of
naturalness that comes through in all
religious poetry of writers whose religion
is part of their country's everyday life.
His Excellency the President addressing the gathering
during the unveiling ceremony.
A Christmas Fancy tells in homely words the
meaning of the Irish traditional custom of
setting the Christmas candle at the window
of the house:-
She set her holy candle inside the window
pane,
The happy time of Christmas had come to
earth again;
She said, "O Mary mother, and Joseph
good and true,
And little Child of Bethlehem, there's
welcome here for You.
On the left, the tree on the old hill fort and in
the centre of the skyline can be seen the ruins of
the belfry of the medieval church.
"I'm poor and old and lonely , but peace is
on my floor,
And there is always greeting for travellers
at my door;
And glad would be my sharing of bite and
sup with Them
Who'd seek the room in Erin denied at
Bethlehem.
"I have two sheets of linen, sun-dried and
beautiful,
I have two fleecy blankets of snowy Irish
wool,
A knitted quilt with fringes to lay upon the
bed,
And a little downy pillow to fit a Baby head.
" I have two cups of china with saucers
that are mates,
A jug with roses on it, and two blue china
plates,
I'd take these from my dresser for Lady
Mary's sake
To serve with milk and apples and floury
raisin cake.
"I'd tend the Maiden Mother with eager
hands of joy
And ask no fonder pleasure than gazing at
her Boy;
Then, when my Guests were slumbering
I'd say my Rosary,
Nor pray to enter Heaven for Heaven had
come to me."
In this verse from A Christmas Song how
pithily the tragedy of the proud world is
mourned:-
The world, grown weary of wasting strife ,
Had called on the Christ to rise,
For sin had poisoned the springs of life,
And only the dead were wise;
But, wrapped in a dream of scornful pride,
Too high were its eyes to see
A Child, foredoomed to be crucified,
On a peasant Mother's knee.
Christmas Verses, published in 1934 at The
Sign of the Three Candles, Dublin, was the
only book of her poems published in
Ireland until the Souvenir booklet to
commemorate the unveiling of her monument
last year. In New York the first
selection of her poems was published in
1913 by P.J. Kenedy and Son under the
title Songs of Dawn. In 1926, The Irish
Book Shop, Lexington Avenue, brought
out another book of her work, The Flame
of Ireland. Very many later poems of hers
appeared in newspapers and periodicals
here and in the United States. They have
yet to be collected into a new volume of
her works.
We who are fortunate enough to have
the literary canons proposed by Professor
Corkery may assess her place in Anglo-Irish
literature or compare her best poems
with the poems of Colum, and we heartily
concur with the view of the late Aodh de
Blacam, who pleaded that all such writing
which preserved the soul of Gaelicism was
the means, powerful above all others,
towards Gaelicisation, its medium of
English being, he held, all to the good, in
the years of transition. Perhaps we may yet
see the realisation of his hopes that the
selected works of William Byrne, Patrick
Kelly, Teresa Brayton and other poets, who
expressed the true soul of Ireland's Catholic
people, will be published in inexpensive
editions easily acquired by our people.
In believing that there was a demand as
well as a purpose for the work of these
writers, it would seem that he had too true
a sense of literature and history to be very
much wrong. One thousand copies of the
Teresa Brayton Souvenir booklet (containing
some of her poems) sold out within a few
days, and a second thousand copies sold out
as quickly. He would, doubtless, have
regarded as further proof the faces, avid
with interest, of all the people who braved
the downpours on that October day to
witness the unveiling ceremony in Cloncurry
graveyard and their applause for the
His Excellency the President reviews the
Guard of Honour of the local Fórsa Cosanta
Áitiul, on the day of the unveiling ceremony.
Very Reverend Doctor Corkery when he
said in his graveside address:-
" Some people in their ivory towers and
synthetic garrets might decry our
presence here and the verse of the poet,
but she spoke in the language she knew,
expressing the heart-break of the exile
and the yearning for freedom. Some of
the beatniks might think us foolish, but
those who would advance Ireland furthest
must base our future on the traditions of
the past.
"We honour Teresa Brayton, too, as
a woman, for it was the mothers and
grandmothers of Ireland who kept the
traditions of the country alive.
"We hope that this occasion is symbolic
not only of our pride in the past, but
also of our determination to make the
future worthy of the past."
Many elegies and personal laments came
from Teresa Brayton's pen, and, for the
people leaving Cloncurry cemetery, these
lines which she wrote on the death of
another patriot Irish-woman, Elizabeth
Somers, must surely come nearest to what
they carried in their hearts:-
Soon will the spring with tender breath
Woo verdure from your covering sod
While you, triumphant over death,
Go singing up the slopes of God.
But Irish lips will speak your name,
And Irish hearts hold as their own
The one whose life burned as a flame
Upon her country's altar stone.
A wise American critic had said, over
forty years ago, that the songs of Teresa
Brayton, like Beranger's of France, will live
when more ambitious efforts are laid in
dust on the shelf. But the intuition of that
graveside throng was not, of course, to make
comparisons with Beranger or Burns, nor
to pay tribute to a mere writer of English
verse, but to honour the most lately dead
of the poets of their own Gaelic tradition,
one in spirit with Seamus Mac Cuarta who
sleeps in the plains of Louth, or Aodhagan
Ó Rathaille far south in Muckross, or that
other poet from the Golden Age, who,
for all we now know, may have been laid
to rest within sight of her own grave.
