It is not the new and the exotic which can overwhelm the mind with fresh
experience and fill the heart with feeling as a storm might fill a valley with
movement and turmoil. It is the old and familiar unexpectedly seen in a new
light and suddenly rousing and bringing together before a fierce wind of poetry
the deep memories and meanings that heart and mind had laid casually away.
One day, last year, I suddenly came on a farmhouse that was once familiar
to me as my own home. In a way, it had been my home and when I saw it
unexpectedly and stared with quickening breath at the chimneys and the dark-blue
slates glinting beyond the surrounding tall green conifers under the afternoon
sun, I had to pause for a few moments to
let my heart beat more easily. But my
mind was in a storm. Gusts of turbulent
images and memories streamed through it,
effacing the routine world in which I lived
and sweeping aside seasons and years and
decades like leaves blown from a woodland
floor. Curiously, I calmed myself
with the badly recalled lines of a very old
piece of Irish verse that acted like a soothing
incantation. Kuna Meyer's translation of
the whole piece runs:
The fort over against the oak-wood,
Once it was Bruidge's, it was Cathal's,
It was Aed's, it was Ailill's,
It was Conaing's, it was Cuiline's,
And it was Maelduin's:
The fort remains after each in his turn
And the Kings asleep in the ground.
The lines weren't exactly relevant. They
contrast human change and mortality with
the almost monumental physical permanence
of a homestead that had housed
and sheltered many generations. What I
was experiencing in that storm of feeling,
as I looked down on the farmhouse, was a
most poignant sense of immemorial human
stability in the midst of physical change.
And the lines of old verse, incantatory and
sedative, suddenly bestowed order and a
sort of design on memories and feelings. I
seemed to be not outside but inside the
process of history, the history of my own
people and my own country such as is
never written down in books; and that is
why I try to write it down now.
Let me go back to the moment of that
unexpected vision. I had been driving up
from Waterford through County Kilkenny
towards Dublin. For no other reason than
to give variety to the journey, I took the
road that leads through Bennettsbridge
towards the village of Gowran. The
summer grass was deep and thick in the
fields and the hedges blown full with
foliage. In that half-daze that comes over
the most attentive of travellers, I noticed
the trim prosperous houses, the gate-piers
kept in good order, the gravelled drives,
the gardens of roses, lilies, geraniums,
snapdragons and stock and tall Michelmas
daisies. I recall that I remarked to myself
how this landscape had changed since I
had fast seen it more than forty years
before, how old tumble-down crouching
cottages and cabins had disappeared, how
blue, green and even vermilion paint now
shone on door and window of slated houses
under the mellow sunlight. These hardworking
people were not poor any more.
So I passed between the deep hedges and
the scattered neat houses, climbed a hill and
looked down. A mile away below me to
the right of the winding road, a tall, long,
two-storey house lifted its dark-blue roof
and chimneys above the tops of encircling
trees. It looked secure as the distant hills
that lay under fleecy drifting clouds, as
secure as the fort that had belonged to
Maelduin, Aed, Ailill .... The mothering
trees, the level roof, and the wisp of smoke
that uncoiled stealthily from the middle
chimney, were expressions of human comfort
and long planning that in themselves
were a comfort to perceive. I thought that
it was, and would be, a good place to live.
It belonged where it stood, belonged to
the hedged fields spreading around it, to
the trees, even to the afternoon light that
picked out the rising wisp of smoke and
the thin lines of the slates. Then, recognition
came with a shock, a violence in the
blood like a long roll of drums, as I realized
that the house I looked down on was where
my mother was born and reared and that
she had always loved it with a frightening
passion till the day she died more than
thirty years ago.
I pulled the car into the side of the road
at the top of that hill, sat still until my
mind went quiet again, listened and
remembered and saw more than the house
among the trees. What I heard was the
blessed silence, omnipresent as the daylight,
that men in cities will eat out their hearts
to regain. It was so clear and unflawed that
from far away the sound of children's
voices carried like a perfectly articulated
song and after them there rang faintly the
lonely barking of a dog. Why is it that
the distant barking of a dog can flood a
whole landscape with an almost painful
loneliness' I had often felt the pangs of
that loneliness as I walked the fields of this
countryside and the pangs were none the
less for my knowing that men had been
living on this land and herding cattle and
sheltering from weather and wild beasts
before the Christian word was ever heard
in the island. On the hillside to the left
of where I had pulled up my car, there
stood a circle of trees around an almost
smoothly level ring of earth-the embankment
of an old fort that guarded huts and
cattle probably when men were still using
swords and knives of bronze. In one field
at least, of the farm below me, there stood
another ancient but smaller site, overgrown
with brambles and thorn trees, a
very lonely place indeed; and there, too,
men had lived, rearing families, herding
cattle, digging a little, and at last leaving
one day what generations had made, or
dying in a battle or of a plague. And no
man coming after them would ever plough
up where they had lived as if the act of
human habitation were consecratory.
What I saw below me, then, was not the
blue-slated house among the trees but the
earlier house that I had first known forty-five
years before. There were only a few
trees in those days, not conifers, but a
sycamore and an elm, and a most ancient
apple tree, twisted, gnarled, angular and
anguished by age. The house was one-storeyed,
and it lay half under thatch and
half under slate, with its gable-end to the
narrow road that could be ankle-deep with
dust of summer. The yard before the half-door
of the house was beaten earth, and
round two sides were outhouses and a
stone barn that always seemed to smell of
potatoes, or apples, or fish-meal, or bacon
in barrels of brine, and even of honey
stacked in frames. It was a place for hard
work and hard living. Enough of both
could keep a man decent and out of debt - but
no more.
So, in the yard was the house; and in
the house was the hearth; and beside the
hearth was the man who had made the
hearth. He had his name painted on the
side of his carts, black lettering on the
blue: Matthew Murphy, Bodal.

He was my mother's father. To the
child and then to the boy, myself, who
lived every summer in his house, he never
looked anything but incredibly old, tough,
gnarled like the ancient apple tree on
which powdery light green moss grew like
a tattered beard. A life that had never been
easy had carved him out solidly, seasoned
him, made him knotty, hardened his flesh,
set his eyes deeply in his head so that they
seemed to pierce out of a darkness, streaked
his face with corrugations and wrinkles,
and deepened the furrows on either side of
his long upper lip. He dominated; he even
domineered. A word could sound like a
whip-lash or a terrifying growl. Yet, the
child's grandmother seemed to manage
and manoeuvre him in and out of anger
and melancholy and fits of bad temper with
a sweet and soft-spoken adroitness.
Night after night he sat beside the hearth
in the kitchen that was lit by a small, deeply
recessed window looking out on a garden
of roses, lilies, raspberries, gooseberries,
strawberries and a few apple trees. Always,
in the evening he bade the child sit with
him, to talk, to read to him, or just to
listen, while the light faded in the window
and the open fire glowed up ruby-red,
and far away dog responding to dog across
the fields commanded the flood of loneliness
to flow. Two widely separated generations
sat by that fireside and in a very
certain way there was communion between
them. The child was in awe, sometimes a
little frightened, but yet held by love to the
half-blind, slow-moving man who gave
meaning upon meaning to fields, people,
a house, a hearth, life itself
One day, the child had seen him re-make
the hearth. The child perceived every hand's
turn in what seemed a wonderful piece of
work but he had to become a man before
he began to understand the profound
significance of the act. Perhaps the child
did indeed appreciate what was being done
as he followed the old man out to a field
at the back of the house, watched him dig
in a special place for yellow clay which the
spade cut like cheese, saw him blending it
with water and laying it on the fire-floor
with a trowel until it was sleek, shiny and
wet like the side of a fish. The child knew
the virtue of that puddled clay. He had dug
for it, mixed it with water and moulded it
with his hands into shapes that crudely
represented pig, horse, cock, hen, cow,
sheep, man and woman, and left them to
bake in the sun. But the sun dried the life out
of them and bleached them butter-yellow
colour; they cracked and split, whitened,
crumbled and returned to earthy chaos.
The hearth remained solid. It was tamped
and pow1ded hard. The heat petrified it.
As he knelt, groaning with the creaks and
aches of old age in knee and back, the
grandfather began to tell about how often
he had dug the clay and laid the hearth,
and about how long there had been a
hearth on that floor, and what people had
sat before the fire-his houseful of daughters
who had scattered to the ends of Ireland
and the earth, America and Africa; his
own father who remembered the gaunt,
feverish, haunted people sinking to the
blighted earth in the mortal years of the
Great Famine.
When the old man stood up, groaning,
to crouch with bent back and look down
on his handiwork, and to praise it as the
best hearth in all the country, there was
drying clay on his heavy, half-laced boots,
on his trousers that were bow1d with string
below the knees, on his hands, arms and
even on his face. Like bird and beast that
the child had fashioned, he, too, was of
clay: ageing Adam returning to that from
which creative fingers of God had shaped
him: Adam standing above the hearth,
man crouched over the floor laid for the
fire: the focus, the centre of house and of
household. Not the child nor the boy but
the man really perceived and appreciated
the almost sacramental reverence of that
act which made the grandfather one with
the long generations, a familial member of
the communities that linked and bound
together his father's father's father back to
those lost centuries, even before Christian
missionaries moved among the people,
when a man and a woman and children
sat on the floor of a wattled hut, plastered
and floored with this same yellow clay
within an earthen embankment. But what
the man perceived and appreciated had
been given to him as a child and boy by that
grandfather and he never forgot it.
It was a precious thing, a sense of human
community, a sense of the unfolding of
history which was not abstract and cold as
it is in books. With it went a sense of human
relationship with place, with field, crop,
clay, accepted in all the trials of season and
weather as what God sent.
That relationship was revealed in the way
the old man might turn away from looking
up at a swollen sky that threatened damage
or destruction with rain, hail and wind to a
field of hay or oats or wheat, and purse up
his almost toothless mouth to murmur,
"He never failed us yet", or "He knows
what He's doing", or "He will send us
another day". The old man and his father
before him had seen other and worse days,
and they had survived, ploughed, reaped,
built and reared their children in the eternal
pieties. No day ever ended without the
nightly prayers in the kitchen; old man
and grandmother; son ; later, son's wife;
grandchild; visitors; workmen, all kneeling
against stool, chair and table to follow the
Rosary which the old man led sternly and
reverently, sometimes groaning out supplications and rattling the heavy horn beads
between his knuckly fingers. But before
the prayers there were always those last
evening hours when the child was made to
read to the old man and when, in his
turn, the old man was made to tell stories
to the child.
What the old man liked to hear read
were stories from history, from books,
local papers, even from children's magazines,
which were piled in the recess of the
window. He could never have enough, it
seemed, of those stories which his failing
sight, dimming his blood-shot eyes, no
longer allowed him to read for himself. He
would sit still in his chair, back to the wall
beside the fire, his chin on his chest, his
hat tilted forward on his head, his hands
clasped as closely as the calloused flesh and
swollen knuckles would permit. There was
never a more attentive listener, breathlessly
still, interrupting occasionally only to
correct a mispronunciation, or to exclaim.,
"Lord save us!" or "Be the hokey!". He
lived out every minute of those stories
about O'Donnell' s escape from Dublin
Castle, the march to Kinsale, O'Neill's
final charge at Benburb, Cromwell's sieges
of Drogheda, Wexford, Kilkenny and
Clonmel, Cromwell's troopers on the
roads nearby, the days of the hunted priests,
Wexford in '98 and so on up along to
Famine, Fenians and Land War. He could
never have enough of those stories. Sometimes
he would lift his head at the conclusion of a story and say, "We're still here,
Lord save us, we' re still here", like a man
wondering at the miracle of his own
survival after a war had scoured all other
life out of a countryside.
He had reason to wonder. There had
been bad years in his youth and boyhood
when disasters and near-famines had spelled
out something very like doom. He and
his people had only a shaky, unsure grip
on their land. There was a time when a
wealthy neighbour, a grasping newcomer,
very nearly succeeded in breaking the
Murphys. Family memory, brooding on it,
and repetition of the story in the mind, gave
the events the rhythmic pattern and idiom
of an old folk-tale and, as it were, took the
harm out of them and the understandable
bitterness and resentment.
What had happened away back in the
middle of the last century would be difficult
to set down as coldly dispassionate history.
One can only indicate the elements that
became the story-which has an end as
surely as it had a beginning. The wealthy
neighbour wanted more land. He tried to
buy and failed; and then he tried to threaten,
oust, evict by legal subterfuges and failed
again. What would have been a luxury for
him to get was a sheer necessity for the
Murphys to hold, and his desire for the
land was no less than theirs. One day he
declared to the police that his lands and
house had been raided by Moonlighters
who had been set about the business by one
of the Murphys and that cattle had been
driven off and injured, doors and windows
broken. He was a big man. He persuaded
the parish priest that what he said was true
before he had proved it to the police. From
the pulpit, the priest denounced the outrages,
which was his duty, but named the
Murphys, which was unfortunate. Then,
one unhappy day it was proved to him that
he had been misled, that the Murphys had
had nothing to do with Moonlighters or
outrages, and that the wealthy neighbour
had allowed desire for land to blind him
utterly and to hire the Moonlighters to
damage his own stock and house. The
parish priest is said to have ridden to the
big man's house, lashed him. with his
riding whip and then uttered words that
were accepted as a prophecy. He said:
"The day will come when there will be
not one of you in this house and the
Murphys will still be in Bodal."
This grim story which might have been
taken from a novel by Carleton or the
Banims was heard by the child in snatches,
forgotten or accepted as part of all the
lore that had gathered around house, field,
headland, rath, ruin and stream. In that
kitchen where the old man sat by the
hearth he had made, it was seldom repeated
in full but merely referred to obliquely
with a phrase, the mention of a name, a
shake of the head and a wry smile. Bitterness
has not flowed on through the veins
of the generations. What was done, was
over and done with. Good relations
between neighbours had not been destroyed
for ever. Time healed and time mended,
though even the child could detect a
certain slight coolness, a remoteness rather,
between house and house. It was hardly
more than a faint shadow. As the old man
might have said, using a phrase that sometimes
gave a great dignity to a protest or
a speech of his, it would not have been
"the Christian thing" to have carried on
an ancient quarrel as a perpetual feud.
The chief thing was that the land had
been held and the good name of the family
vindicated before the priest. The desire to
hold the acres together had only been
intensified and made more durable. But it
was more than a desire to hold acres
together, field with field, for it was not
dissociated from use. In fact, the desire
implied use, ploughing, digging, sowing
and reaping, grazing, ditching and draining.
It implied respecting the earth, cherishing
it, coaxing it and keeping it in good
heart. One summer, the child saw what
this meant and what he saw, the boy and
the man remembered and meditated, never
exhausting the significance deeper than the
deepest well.
That summer was nearly the old man's
last. He had been failing. He wouldn't
admit that he was unfit for hard work, or
that he walked slowly with dragging feet,
or that he found it very hard to distinguish
face from face. When his married daughter,
and their husbands and children came to
visit, he played the patriarch; and they
flattered his years, told him how well he
looked and then glanced at each other
with anxious eyes because really he was
not as good as he had been. He still tried
to dominate but his wife, the granny, now
bossed him, told him to have a ha'porth
of sense and not to be overreaching his
strength. Sometimes he was anxious that
things were not being done right, which
meant that they were not being done in his
own set way. He need not have worried.
His son, the only one of his children to stay
at home, and his daughter-in-law, were
managing with vigour and industry what
would become a better, bigger, more
comfortable and more prosperous place.
Trees had been planted; walls and outhouses
built and repaired; the dwelling-house
had been enlarged and slated . . .
and all the time the old man argued or
gave orders as though he were doing the
work himself.
The problem was to keep him busy but
not to let him exhaust his dwindling
strength. About a quarter of a mile from the
house, alongside a cart road, he had fow1d
a corner of a field, and there, during the
last years, he had dug, manured, sown and
drilled a few rows of early potatoes. Out of
all the acres he had ever trudged and tilled
in every sort of weather and in every
season, this corner was what his life had
come to, and it meant more than any acres
his ancestors had disputed and held. The
child saw how carefully and jealously he
dug, how he would bend and run the clay
through his fingers as if it was gold, how
he would grope to feel the stalks and leaves,
and how he longed for the day when he
would dig and bring home a half-bucket
for dinner. There were days when he
dragged himself across the fields in wind
and rain so that he could have a look at his
own special potatoes. There would never
be any potatoes like them. They would
be big, puffy and floury, tasty and nourishing.
A man would need no more than a
few of them with a lump of fresh butter
from the dairy and a mug of buttermilk
from the churn.
The child sensed that the potatoes were
a joke among the grown-ups-and a
source of anxiety. Some day the old man
might fall in a weakness among the drills
and, God save us, die without the priest or
without anybody near him; and all for
potatoes that were no different from the
crop that was growing by the ton in other
fields for market, household, pigs and fowl.
But the child did not believe that. He
believed in the old man who praised the
clay that trickled between his fingers, who
felt for the stalks and most meticulously
put clay to them, dug them out ceremoniously,
washed them with his own hands,
and ate them with the relish of a survivor
who suddenly felt again the chill of a Great
Famine winter in his bones. They were
big potatoes. They were floury. They were
tasty. The child was willing to believe that
they were more precious than gold. Not
he but the man he grew to be, came to know
that in the corner of that field, the last
confinement of his energy and his labour,
the old granda had been doing many
wonderful and heroic things all at the
same time; he had been fighting off the
darkness in his eyes and the weakness in
his limbs; he had been refusing to surrender
to old age; he had been professing his
faith in the land God gave him and rejoicing
in growth and increase; he had been praising
life and praising God with every dragging
footstep that brought him moping in his
half-blindness out from the chair beside
the hearth he had laid down with his own
hands.
The child was not living in the house
when he died, but he was brought there
on the day of the funeral when the road,
the yards and the haggard were full of
cars and people and the air was full of
murmuring voices. He was mostly silent,
somewhat lost and a little remote like the
other children among all the aunts and
uncles and relations, a tribe that had
grown out of one household. They gathered
in the parlour, a room that had always
seemed darkish and secluded, where stood
on tables and hung on the walls the photographs-
the nun who was in Africa; the
daughter who was in California; and the
old couple, the granny and the granda,
he with his brows jutting over his deep
fiery eyes. They wandered around the
yard and the haggard, out to the orchard
where the rows of humming hives were
arranged under the fruitful trees. They
noted improvements, extensions, growth.
There was a cadence in all their voices.
The rush of words descended, down,
down to a murmur and a whisper and a
silence, and men nodded their heads and
women dabbed their eyes. But the loss,
the great gaping void in earth and sky;
who would say about it what the child
wished to say:
The granny said it. As the coffin was
being carried across the yard towards the
hearse and the priest and there was silence
everywhere except for the scraping of feet,
she broke from the women who held her
and flung herself between the coffin-bearers
and cried out. She cried out her
husband's name three times. The cry was
the void itself, the loss.
Nobody would dig again in the un-regarded
corner of a big field and grow the
best potatoes in the whole wide world.
I start the engine of the car, fumbling
like a man drugged by a dream with gear-lever
and wheel, and idle down the hill
towards the house among the trees. Like
the aftermath of a long vivid dream, a
journey recedes in my mind and I remark
the realities of hot afternoon sun, warm
sliding air, the noise of the engine and
again the voices of children at play. The
journey now seems immeasurable in miles.
Only lifetimes can measure it since the
utterly remote day a man laid down a clay
hearth in a low cottage and a child watched
the new fire starting in the armful of
withered furze and twigs-kindling that
could blow a sharp scented smoke across
the centuries from wattled huts in earthen
forts.
Slowly I ease past the grove of sheltering
conifers which I saw planted by the old
man's good son as saplings no taller than a
child. In the mottled shade beneath them,
fat cattle stand sonu1olent, quietness drawn
about them. Gates, wrought-iron railings,
walls and roofs are in fine trim, painted,
pointed and pebble-dashed. Along the rear
wall of the house - where the small
recessed kitchen-window had given light
for a child to read stories to an old man-a
long, white greenhouse leans, packed to the
panes with tomato plants and chrysanthemums.
Where the old garden lay in a
patchwork of box-edged paths, fruit bushes,
shrubs and flowers, there stretches the
tight clipped turf of a tennis-court where
some of Matthew Murphy's great grandchildren
are playing. They are strange, yet
familiar young people, all full of vitality
and brightness who yet display through a
quick glance, a turn of the head, a grin,
a gesture, the shape of mouth or brow,
something of the old man. I stop the car
and enter a yard that is banked by beds of
flowers luxuriant as in a tropical hot-house.
It's all fearfully strange, yet achingly
familiar. I am reluctant to approach the
door, dreading a little to find strangeness
in a house that has renewed itself so
robustly, grown, taken more light, colour
and space into rooms, filled them with new
furniture and with gleaming household
appliances-and with so many people,
voices, laughter, and all the bustle and
hurly-burly of well-founded healthy human
continuity.
The old man, too, would find it hard to
recognise the house. But recognition would
come and with it, rejoicing, loud, bragging
rejoicing about wall, roof, tree, land, and
about grandchildren and great grandchildren.
Be the hokey ! He would see
bright morning come at last after the
protracted tumultuous night of Irish history
which, in the days of his own youth, manhood
and old age, he had rehearsed so
often in his mind, whether he was out in
the fields or seated in his own chair beside
the fire, warming his shins and listening
to a child. His hope had been justified. He
and his had trusted in God and God had
looked after them.
* * *
Presently I was brought into the house.
It was like entering a nation. There was
my uncle, now grandfather, fresh as a
boy for all his years; and his wife, now
grandmother, gentlest of women; and
their son, another Matthew, and Matthew's
wife, and their children. . . . It was all
welcome.
Sometime in the evening I learned that
an ancient story, told like a folktale, had
come to the end which an angered parish
priest had foretold nearly a century ago.
That neighbour's house where Moonlighters
had driven off cattle and raised a
hurly-burly in the darkness of the night,
was at last empty, and the land was for
sale.
"It's a queer thing," my uncle said, " that
what the priest foretold should come out
true in the end. But it's a sad thing."
* * *
When I came back home to Dublin, I
was still thinking on the old man and I
remembered that he and his kind who
had endured and recorded so much in
mind, flesh and bone, had once set me
writing a piece of verse about their world
and ours. It will serve as a wreath for the
grave of Matthew Murphy, Badal:
I hear the old men's talk of bitter years,
Those wintry fields that thawed to life at last;
They crouch around the fire, chilled by old
fears
As this dead friend and that go ghosting past
Through half-remembered days. I hear
them speak
Of Charles Stewart Parnell. Old wraths
arise ,
And palsied hands grip blackthorn knobs
to wreak
The undelivered vengeance in the eyes.
I hear them mourn some weedy, ruined place
The landlord's men destroyed so long ago
That these men mumbling here seem like
a race
Which lingered on ... Indeed how can we
know
What weathering these bones endured,
what strain
Pressed patiently on courage, heart and mind
Till hope was custom, a song's refrain,
A ballad-monger's bawling and he blind?
There's more in them than talk can ever free :
There's famine, sunken-bellied, ribbed
and boned,
The Faith gone furtive from the gallows tree,
And crazy women, husbandless, who moaned
Unending funerals of slaughtered sons.
There's stealth in them, and Fenian craft,
defeat,
The helpless hearing of unanswered guns,
Their dead men's challenge from the
winding sheet,
Informers' Judas-victories; there's flame,
There's resurrection for a nation's name.
I stir the fire and listen while the night
Draws lonesomely against the window-pane;
They aye their talk to stillness and the light
Cuts monumental shadows once again.
And so the old men sit as tired winds boom
Above the chimney-shaft, and lifetimes fade
With every sinking voice, until the room
Is like a porch where all our dead delayed
For final scattering.
They're going now,
Stumbling a homeward road, half-knowing
how
They were the makers of the land they've
made.
