Whether you consider Homer
to be a great original poet or an
incredibly unanimous committee,
you must admit that between the "nods"
he, or they, gave voice to some Great
Thoughts in a couple of poems which are
generally labelled " Immortal". And, except
in the theological sense, may we not give
this accolade to compositions which were
already two-and-a-half thousand years old
when the first " Immortal" was elected to
the French Academy? Moreover, like
Charley's Aunt, they are "still running",
though it cannot be hoped that they will
survive the funeral pyre at Armageddon,
for which the nations are so industriously
gathering the kindling. But they are
approaching the three thousandth year of
Life and Use, and are not mere archaeological
finds, long lost and newly discovered.
"Great Literature", surely! But why? Not
because of its antiquity merely; not because
its language is a cenotaph before which
erudition maintains a flame of memory, but
because it is the Line of Communication
between a Great Mind-whether of a Man
or a People-and Us who bring to its
perusal a willingness to comprehend and
an ability to rise towards its level of " high
seriousness" . It is indeed an axiom that only
Great Minds are capable of Great Thoughts,
and Mean Minds of Trivialities only. It is
quite as true that We, the recipients, receive
in the measure of our receptiveness, our
capability to receive.
Ancient writings, both sacred and profane, have in modern times received an
access of interest for reasons quite irrelevant
to their intrinsic value and meaning for
human-kind. I remember vividly the
words of a very great Biblical scholar (ar
dheis láimh Dé go raibh a anam) at a lecture:
" Nowadays, archaeologists are actually
proving to the senses what our Reverend
Chairman and I had to accept as Articles of
Faith when we were students together."
His amused scrutiny of the faces before
him flickered, now and again, into a smile
of commendation, and I knew that his
eyes had rested upon a listener who was
not "called Didymus", though there were
many too intent upon scientific unessentials
to note the gentle sarcasm in his words.
So, too, the profane literature of Ancient
Greece is mistaken for a blueprint for the
archaeologist.
There certainly seems to be some weird
kind of interest driving people to search
for the fullacht fiaidh, or hunting-hearth, on
which Odysseus prepared his morning
porridge while his companions were eating
theirs out of a trough "up at Circe's
place". And, in modern times, I have no
doubt that the positive identification of one
of the progeny of Allingham' s "Four
Ducks"-that were "on a pond", you
remember-would bring tears to the eyes
of some "literary detective"; while litterateur
and tourist alike would fall on reverent
knees before Yeats's "old brown thorn
trees", with hearts choked by "thoughts
that lie too deep for tears", and the really
scientific, modern critic would examine
them closely to be assured that they did
break in two, and not in three. While
excellent for Tourism, this is a far cry
from the Literary Criticism of fifty years
ago, though we find a very varied assortment
of ideas about it as we turn back the
secular pages.
Now, the educating of a people, that is
the raising of their standard of culture, is a
slow business and is spread progressively
over several generations. And the Irish,
who were officially barred from any kind
of teaching four, or five, generations ago,
naturally sought, and found, a purely
bread-and-butter type of "education" when
the ban was lifted. For the bulk of the
people matters beyond the "Three R's"
were affairs of the Soul, and they were safe
in the hands of the Church; except for their
Religion, there had been a complete break
with the standard of culture reached by the
nation before the early seventeenth century.
Except for a certain Class, and certain
exceptions elsewhere, there was no acknowledgement
of the place of the Arts
in education; nor is there yet a full realisation
of this. Yet there was, and is, the
compensation that the Immortal part of
man is not left out of consideration as is the
case in some countries which are alleged to
possess a more advanced educational system
and culture than ours.
But, to many an Irishman, the World of
the Arts is a World of Unreality, a "cloud-cuckoo-
land" that never was, is not, nor
ever will be. So far, his average education
does not disabuse him of this fallacy ; and
he lives happily a Jekyll-and-Hyde existence,
in one state of which he is the hardest-headed
businessman in Europe, while in
the other he accepts Literature and the
other Arts as belonging to a world apart in
which unusual happenings are the order
of the day. That was, of course, the general
conception among all the peoples of
Europe, as is evidenced by all the early
Literatures, but they have since developed
into the modern idiom. Had there been
no break with our Language and Civilisation,
or if that break had come with the
invasion of the Normans in the twelfth
century, the results would have been far
different; but the break was deliberately
made and deliberately maintained by
another race-dominantly English, even if
with an admixture of Norman-centuries
later; and that we salvaged anything of our
heritage is a Miracle. Incidentally, the
most astonishing feature of the whole set-up
was that the bulk of the oppressors' own
Literature was Celtic in origin (driven by
the English from Britain to Brittany, thence
to France and, so, back to Britain, now
England, with the Normans in 1066),
while not a trickle from the cognate Irish
source flowed into the flood of English
which was engulfing this country! The
sad fact is that the natural development of
our culture was prevented and we did
not take kindly for a long time to that of
the tyrant, though we must confess to a
lamentable lack of persevering sales-resistance.
The rift created by the "Flight of
the Earls", and all that it connotes, was
constantly being widened by clever ruthless
policy until, except for Religion, there was
really nothing left but the inextinguishable
Love of Country, so that the men who rose
in arms, or even in parliamentary manoeuvre,
for the next three centuries knew
little or nothing, except at second-hand, of
the ancient tongue and the ancient culture.
It is not strange then that when, towards
the beginning of this century, the intellectuals
turned away from the English
mode (while yet using the English language)
towards the continental (French,
Russian, etc.) and towards the long-dead
Gaelic culture, the great mass of the
unaroused, half-educated citizens should
distrust and misunderstand them, and
should confuse the Moral with the Aesthetic
of which it knew nothing, and the Patriotic
with both for "All our Saints are Heroes,
and all our Heroes Saints". It is not strange
that the Moral should stand in the forefront
of the Irishman's critical judgement,
for the Catholic Faith was the only part of
his inheritance that he had not surrendered
by the end of the nineteenth century; even
his Patriotism had degenerated into a game
of chicanery with the English political
parties. When the subterranean waters of
purification burst forth, their force and
efficacy might well have been dissipated
in a multitude of little dribbling streamlets
but that they were all re-channelled through
the mind of Pearse (Thomas Davis's
"Irish-born man" personified), and loosed
in imperishable words upon a yet-uncomprehending
people at the grave of
the Fenian, O'Donovan Rossa. Now the
target was set higher than ever before:
an Ireland "Not Free only but Gaelic as
well"; and that high aim was maintained
until it was signed away on December 6,
1921, though quite unwittingly and in all
honesty. Yet, once the "sights" were
lowered, as had happened so often before,
the Nation's guns wrought havoc on
itself, creating dissension and confusion
from which there is not yet complete
recovery.
It must not be forgotten that the Literary.
Renascence, though in the English tongue,
made powerful contribution to the National
resurgence, for many of the writers of that
time had reached back to the forgotten,
but imperishable, traditions of our freedom
and greatness: Ferguson, whom Yeats
thought to be Ireland's greatest poet, and
Standish O'Grady had opened for them a
vista to the ancient glory of the majestic
past. The revival of the native tongue, in
which many of them believed, made its
incalculable contribution to that proud,
defiant and prophetic declaration at the
grave of Rossa, to its "sequel" in the 1916
Proclamation, and to its almost-fulfilment
through the blood and tears of the
"Glorious Years" that followed. The
Nation showed its comprehension and
appreciation when it unanimously elected
Douglas Hyde the First President of
Ireland under the Constitution of 1939,
though he had not believed in the possibility
of a Victory in Arms.
In view of this, and the early acceptance
back to the fold of Eoin MacNeill by the
survivors of those who had fought, against
his orders, in 1916; the forgiveness of the
political leaders who had faltered on their
way; the forgiveness of those who even
attempted to thwart the forward march of
the Nation; and the co-operation in
government of the opponents in the
bitterness of Civil War, it must be granted
to us that we possess an incomprehensible
faculty for retrieving the irretrievable,
which augurs well for progress in the future
despite present impatiences with the views
and methods of the other people. On the
other hand, we have the international
reputation of having, proportionately, more
"exiled" writers than any other articulate
people; and no distinction is made between
those who emigrated because they did not
like the kind of living they could make here
and those who emigrated because we did
not like the way they wanted to make a
living here. We are a strange people,
surely-but not unique, in view of Ibsen's
treatment in his native land-and we have
a "quare way" of doing things, even the
right things, for the wrong reasons. But,
we do make progress ! You see, while it is
easy to recognise Great Literature that has
lasted hundreds, or thousands, of years of
use, it is not so easy to acclaim it when it is
making its debut under your nose!
Immortality is not conferred by a generation,
nor yet by the clamour of a minority.
There is no concise formula by which
one may distinguish Great Literature from
merely Good Literature, nor is there such a
formula in the case of the other Arts;
and, in a country so bedevilled by Compulsory
Mathematics, all the answers are
expected by formulae. Hence, while we
accept- rather too trustfully, in view of
the history of such theories-a highly
imaginative conception of an "Expanding
Universe", because it is the youngest child
of a family of promiscuous formulae, we
regard the Arts as a somewhat disreputable
crew for lack of formulae of any kind in
their ancestry ! We make exceptions of
works in the Greek and Latin languages,
particularly if we have merely an unsound
knowledge of the elementary grammar;
those languages are dead, you know, and
the dead are always respectable-de mortuis
nil nisi bonum !
No! There is no short-cut to an understanding
and appreciation of the Best in
the sensory Arts; they are an "acquired
taste", that is a developed taste. They
appeal to the Eye and the Ear of the
Imagination, and the eye and the ear must
be trained in perceptive appreciation so as
to arouse the imagination of the recipient
to rise and accept the gifts of the Artist's
imagination, which he, in turn, is compelled
to bestow lest they become atrophied
in him and he die the death, as is mirrored
so clearly in that frightening parable of the
Talents. This it is that appals Milton when
facing up to the fact of his blindness-not
the blindness itself, mind you, but. . .
When I consider how my light is spent
Ere half my days, in this dark world and
wide,
And that one talent which is death to hide
Lodged with me useless, though my soul
more bent
To serve therewith my Maker, and present
My true account, lest He returning chide,
etc.
But the poet, bearing patiently his great
affliction, argues that the Omnipotent,
needing nothing from man, will accept as
service the uncomplaining resignation to
the burthen, for those
who best
Bear His mild yoke, they serve Him best.
Yet, after this, the blind Milton wrote
The Twelve Books of Paradise Lost, The
Four Books of Paradise Regained and
Samson Agonistes, the best example of the
Classical form of drama in English, though
not a good play. So, Milton was making
assurance doubly sure, for his God was
Oliver Cromwell's God; and we, in
Ireland, know how little Christian Charity
was in that conception of Divinity. Personally,
I have a sneaking suspicion that the
best candidates for Salvation in all this were
the two women who wrote all those lines,
read them back and corrected them, over
and over again, and finally wrote fair
copies which gave the world for all time
these mighty thoughts in noble verse.
Is there a "Moral" in the story? Of course,
there is: it is that when the Creator bestowed
on some men such Gifts as made them
Artists, He did not abrogate the penalty
laid upon Adam, that of Hard Work; the
rest of it is told better in the Parable of the
Talents than I can tell it.
So we have met a Great Poet, you and I,
and perhaps 'twere as well to begin with
him as our guide to Great Literature, as
Dante chose Virgil to lead him through the
Underworld. Now, if we asked an elementary
school-boy at the half-way stage
to tell us Why Milton should be so regarded,
he would probably reply "Because he wrote
an awful lot!" And the young hopeful
would only be wrong in thinking this to
be the sole qualification. Undoubtedly,
even in the Sonnet from which we quoted
above, Milton displayed a high Quality of
Poetry, as well as an intensity of personal
feeling, which would guarantee those
fourteen lines a place in any volume of
Sonnets, or indeed in any general anthology.
A "Good" poet, even an "Excellent"
poet these short pieces may proclaim
him; but, if he had written twice as many
sonnets as Shakespeare did, he yet would
not be acknowledged as England's Greatest
Poet, exclusive of her Greatest Dramatist.
The supreme epithet demands that the poet
sustain a High Quality of poetry over a
Considerable Quantity of verse, and Milton
does just that: his reputation does not call
for the "judicious selection" which is
required to bolster up the fame of many
other poets. Byron is an example of this,
for, though he certainly produced the
"Considerable Quantity", he only achieved
the "High Quality" spasmodically, and
was too often deceived into mere rhetoric
by his over-energetic feeling, or was at
times shamming insincerely. Keats, on the
other hand, had indeed the "High Quality" ,
but was deprived by an early death of the
final accolade.
Another quality of even lesser literature is
implied in our criticism of Byron,
" Sincerity". This is a very dangerous
word when applied to Literature, for even
"The Great Lexicographer" misled himself
as to its connotation in this context.
In the Moral sense, we all recognise the
" Sincere man" as a Truth-teller, one who
is not a deceiver, one who says only what
he believes and believes what he says;
applied thus to Literature, it would debar
a Christian poet, playwright, or novelist
from presenting Ancient Greeks, or pagan
Irishmen, or modern Buddhists, because
"No man can write serious literature with
his tongue in his cheek" though that is the
sine qua non of the satirist and humorist.
In the Aesthetic connotation, the only one
relevant to Literature, it is equivalent to
"Consistency" , and that is where the
darling of the pedants, the omniscient
Doctor Samuel Johnson, was "over the
hills and awa" in his attack upon Milton's
Lycidas. Basing his criticism on the "Moral"
meaning of " Sincere", he chastises Milton
for presenting Lycidas and the Speaker (the
poet, if you will) as Shepherds, when they
were really University students, and he
avers that the only sincere lines in the poem
are those of the splenetic attack upon the
Bishops. In actual fact, the reverse is the
case, for Milton chose the form of the
Pastoral Elegy as his contribution to the
student laments for the death of their
fellow-student, and in this he must necessarily
present the central figures as Shepherds
, and as long as he maintained
"consistency" in the whole mise-en-scene,
he was "sincere"; but the moment he
stepped outside and gave vent to his
Puritan hatred of episcopacy, he was
utterly insincere from the Literary point-of-view,
and we note that, when he moved on
from his betes noires, he returned to the
Pastoral environment.
In explanation of the implication that
Literary " Sincerity" is a necessary piece of
equipment for the writer who would
portray what is essentially "foreign" to his
own Faith or Culture, a further point must
be made. With such equipment, and a keen
power of observation, a writer can portray
from the outside a character, an environment,
a civilisation, or culture to which he
does not belong, but with which he is en
rapport, quite sympathically, and acceptably
to readers who are, like him, "outsiders".
The "Belonging" will, of course, see
clearly his unwitting errors, but will
forgive a sympathetically-executed picture
its slightly heavy accentuation of light and
shade: indeed, they may be grateful
therefor, if they are sophisticated enough
to cry with Robert Burns,
O wad some Pow'r the giftie gie us
To see oursels as others see us!
It wad frae mony a blunder free us,
And foolish notion.
But, then, Burns was not thinking of
"others" with chips on their shoulders and
hatchets in their hands!
To return to the Literature produced in
Ireland in the English tongue and now
accepted at home as "Anglo-Irish", though
labelled "Irish" abroad except by a handful
of scholarly philologists, there are signs
that the sacrifice of 1916 is bearing cultural
fruit, as well it might since that event has
been named by understanding foreigners
"The Revolution of the Poets". Despite
our many stumblings and the years of
indoctrination that led us to take the dross
for the gold, the New merely because it is
new, the Foreign because it is not native,
we make progress towards an independence
of opinion which is based upon respect for
ourselves and our fellows; only when we
walk sure-footed on such a plane can we
hope for a much wider appreciation of what
is good in the Arts and the production from
within of world-ranking Literature. The
day will be here when we see our Nation
as Yeats-himself so proud, independent
and fearless-saw it as in the last lines of
Kathleen Ni Houlihan:
Brigid: Did you see an old woman going
down the path?
Patrick: I did not, but I saw a young girl
and she had the walk of a queen.
That was written before April 1902, and
spoken from the stage of Saint Theresa's
Hall, Clarendon Street, under the direction
of W. G. Fay, in that month of Spring!
And neither the Gogartian denigrators of
Yeats, nor the most zealous admirers of
Lady Gregory, can take from Yeats that
visionary metamorphosis of "The Old Hag
of Beara" into the symbol of a free young
Nation, advancing "with the Walk of a
Queen" to take her place among the other
nations of the world and so to fulfil the
dream of Robert Emmet. Yeats was a
Patriot and believed that he was actively
participating in the resurgence of a Nation,
politically as well as culturally, and not
merely in the revival of a Language,
important as that is, though he believed
in that too. Hence, after the seemingly
fruitless sacrifice of 1916, when the Nation's
head was bowed and the tears flowed for
another "failure", Yeats could see, with
penetrating and prophetic vision,
All changed, changed utterly:
A terrible beauty is born.
The willing tributes of Suffering and
Death, paid so lavishly to that "Terrible
Beauty" in the years that followed, even to
1923, point clearly to that quality of the
Seer which is the possession of all true
Poets, enabling them to see into the deeds
of men and to estimate their consequences,
at least on the Spiritual plane.
And, now, with Yeats we return to
Great Literature, for he was a Great Poet,
so acknowledged by the award of the
Nobel Prize for Literature as well as by the
unstinted tributes of all who care for
Literature the world over.
Turning to the consideration of how
Great Literature must be conveyed to the
reader, or the hearer, we note that here,
too, Yeats has a lesson for us. While he
altered his plays, or at least some of the
earlier ones, as he learned more of the
idiom of the Stage, he never left alternative
versions of lines of Poetry, as Wordsworth
did. But, then, Wordsworth was bedevilled
by his own " definitions" of the Language
proper to Poetry, and Yeats would not
print a single word that was not the fit
for the thought in his mind. If he were
driven to use the idiom of the succeeding
generation, he would surely have said,
I have measured out my life with silver
coffee spoons
rather than with common "coffee spoons".
On the other hand, he did not agree with
Pope who said,
True wit is nature to advantage dressed,
What oft was thought, but ne'er so well
expressed.
Yet the Dublin of his day, and since,
was hag-ridden by the bon mot, and he
suffered from its half-truth, as others did.
It has a fatal attraction for the lesser
intellectuals, particularly for the clever-clever conversationalists of a coterie. A
modern critic has put it well in an excellent
parody,
Pope springs eternal in the human breast,
What oft was thought, but ne'er so well
expressed.
So, I think that we may safely conclude
that Great Poetry consists of " Noble
Thought nobly expressed" , that is in words
which preclude substitution. See how the
Master Poet-Dramatist, Shakespeare, can
serve up a quip in his usual iambic pentameter
:
A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear,
but, when he wishes to stamp on the mind
an unforgettable picture of the frenzied
Lear defying the storm, he hurls words at
us like stones shot out of a catapult and
returns to the Old English basic sense of
rhythm-Stress-and scorns the spancels
of the counted feet:
Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage!
blow!
You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
Till you have drench'd our steeples,
drown'd the cocks!
You sulphurous and thought-executing, fires,
Vaunt-couriers to oak -cleaving thunderbolts,
Singe my white head! And thou, all-
shaking thunder,
Strike flat the thick rotundity o' the world!
Crack nature's moulds, all germens spill at
once
That make ingrateful man!
Not even Milton's mighty diction is
capable of such invective and yet be
controlled: and emotion intellectually controlled
is the criterion of Art. Surely, no
age might produce two such as Shakespeare
in the mastery of word and thought? Yet.
had Marlowe not died in a tavern brawl,
who knows what might be his achievement?
Five years before, in Doctor Faustus
(of ramshackle construction , 'tis true) he had
written imperishable lines in the last
despairing speech of him who had sold his
soul to the Devil:
Ah, Faustus.
Now hast thou but one bare hour to live.
And then thou must be damn'd perpetually !
Stand still, you ever-moving spheres of
heaven,
That time may cease, and midnight never
come;
Fair Nature's eye, rise, rise again , and make
Perpetual day: or let this hour be but
A year, a month, a week, a natural day,
That Faustus may repent and save his soul!
O lente, lente currite, noctis equi !
The stars move still , time runs, the clock
will strike,
The devil will come, and Faustus must be
damn'd.
O, I'll leap up to my God!-Who pulls
me down?
See, see, where Christ's blood streams in
the firmament!
One drop would save my soul, half a
a drop: ah, my Christ!
Ah, rend not my heart for naming of my
Christ!
Yet will I call on him: O, spare me,
Lucifer! 
Where is it now? 'tis gone: and see, where
God
Stretcheth out his arm, and bends his ireful
Brows!
Mountains and hills, come, come, and fall
on me,
And hide me from the heavy wrath of God!
Here, probably for the first time in the play,
Marlowe has forgotten himself in the
personality of his creation; here, too, we,
the members of the audience, forget ourselves
and suffer in, and through, the soul
of the protagonist. No longer are we
looking at Faustus, and murmuring to
ourselves, "There, but for the grace of
God, goes X.Y." (or "D.M.", for that
matter )-The chain of "impersonation",
from Author, through Actor, to Audience
is complete; and, without that, there is no
"purgation", as postulated by Aristotle for
true Tragedy; there is, indeed, no drama.
It is true that later in this long speech of
fifty-six lines, pitched on the highest
emotional plane, Marlowe becomes a
little melodramatic and rhetorical; but it
is extremely difficult to avoid the rhetorical
in sustained speech of such forceful language;
and, as for the melodrama, it is
quite good " theatre" at any time, and
surely not out of place in a play in which
the man writes a deed of gift of his soul to
Lucifer in his own blood! Moreover, we
are treating of diction only, at a time when
no man, much less a great poet, "cow1ted
out his life with coffee spoons."
How else than as Milton did, could poet
describe the sight that met the eyes of Satan
and Sin, his daughter-paramour, the realm
of Chaos that stretched between Hell and
Heaven, and that new Earth "linked in a
golden chain to that side Heaven from
whence (his) legions fell"?:
Before their eyes in sudden view appear
The secrets of the hoary deep, a dark
Illimitable ocean, without bound,
Without dimension; where length, breadth,
and height,
And time, and place, are lost; where
eldest Night
And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold
Eternal anarchy, amidst the noise
Of endless wars, and by confusion stand.
For Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry, four
champions fierce,
Strive here for mastery, and to battle bring
Their embryon atoms; they around the flag
Of each his faction, in their several clans,
Light-armed or heavy, sharp, smooth,
swift, or slow,
Swarm populous, unnumbered as the sands
Of Barca or Cyrene's torrid soil,
Levied to side with warring winds, and
poise
Their lighter wings.
The Journey of the Magi, by Thomas
Stearns Eliot, is quite startling in its banality
when compared with that of John Milton:
A cold coming we had of it,
Just the worst time of the year
For a journey, and such a long journey:
The ways deep and the weather sharp,
The very dead of winter.
And the camels galled, sore-footed, refractory,
Lying down in the melting snow.
There were times we regretted
The summer palaces on slopes, the terraces,
And the silken girls bringing sherbet.
Then the camel men cursing and grumbling
And running away, and wanting their
liquor and women,
And the night-fires going out, and the lack
of shelters,
And the cities hostile and the towns
unfriendly
And the villages dirty and charging high
prices:
A hard time we had of it.
It is in a different idiom from that of
Paradise Lost, but it makes its point: for the
intention is totally different from Milton's.
Yet it may not be unprofitable to inquire
if we could bear to receive the mighty
theme of Milton, couched in the idiom of
Eliot. And, if not, why not? Is it because
the Dislikers of the "between-the-two-great-
wars idiom" are "old-fashioned", or
that the particular idiom is itself "dated"
(hateful word), and the Likers and Continuators
thereof "out-of-date" (insulting
epithet)?
You see, the Fashion-and it was only a
"fashion"-of cutting your heroes down
to off-the-peg size was merely a phase of
"Realism", which is the road to ruin for
Literature: the ultimate end of which is
"Naturalism", which is Suicide, for
Imagination is the very soul of creative
Art, and the only way to kill the Soul is
by unrepentant Suicide. It is true that,
between their Eastern homes and Bethlehem,
the Magi must have left heaps of
Camel-dung by the way; but Milton (and
his "old-fashioned" admirers) apparently
preferred Frankincense, for he said,
See how from far, upon the eastern road,
The star-led wizards haste with odours
sweet;
and even a person of common nose, like
mine, would prefer Bisto to the other
commodity !
"Look here upon this picture":
On one side lay the Ocean , and on one
Lay a great water, mid the moon was full.
"and on this":
When the evening is spread out against the
sky
Like a patient etherized upon a table.
Tennyson follows the prescription of
Wordsworth in using the veritable "language
of men" , but he throws over it " the
garment of the imagination" which is also
a part of that prescription, so often forgotten
even by the "doctor": while Eliot is
striving after the effect of the "commonplace",
the " cutting-down" technique
again. Wordsworth, too, can often achieve
his own ideal, though not always:
Then sometimes in that silence, while he
hung,
Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprise
Has carried into his heart the voice
Of mountain torrents
So that the manner of expressing the
matter is not so unimportant as some critics
have thought in their revulsion against
Pope's
True Wit is Nature to advantage dress'd,
What oft was thought, but ne'er so well
express'd,
which is, characteristically, not a bit
original, but was often thought! It is
perhaps w1fortw1ate for Pope that he was
such a facile versifier-" I lisped in numbers,
for the numbers came". Always, with
Pope, intellect is supreme so that the
"clever" thought is expressed in " clever"
words; but this is not, in itself, sufficient to
encompass "all that and those" which
constitute poetry , much less "Great Poetry".
Hence the debate goes on as to what Pope
wrote, while his fame continues as " the
most quotable writer of English" -"Pope
springs eternal in the human breast" , you
know! He is, inevitably, the "patron
saint" of all institutions specialising in a
Latinized education, and will so remain
when Saint George has withdrawn into the
mists of dragon-slaying mythology.
Yet, all this notwithstanding, words
matter, the right words, be they monosyllabic
or polysyllabic : and they fall into
the right pattern, than which there can
be no other, provided that they arc
suffused by the poet's sincere and controlled feeling, and are sublimated by his
imagination. All this is Magic, the "white
magic" of which poetry is made, whether it
be Shelly's
Hail to thee, blithe Spirit!
Bird thou never wert,
That from heaven, or near it
Pourest thy full heart
In profuse strains of unpremeditated art;
or Wordsworth's
It is a beauteous evening, calm and free;
The holy time is quiet as a Nun
Breathless with adoration; . . .
or Shakespeare's prelude to a dreadful act,
spoken in Othello's words which are, in
themselves, as quiet as any of those above,
but deadly in the stillness,
Put out the light, and then put out the light:
If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
I can thy former light restore,
Should I repent me: but once put out thy
light,
Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature,
I know not where is that Promethean heat
That can thy light relume, When I have
pluck'd the rose,
I cannot give it vital growth again,
It needs must wither.
And, now, having come thus far, we
find that Poetry alone has been the subject
of our "musings": Prose and the Drama,
important as they are and largely as they
figure in Great Literature, have completely
eluded us. Nor can we even offer a sincere
apology, for that is the manner of
"Musing": it is quite intractable to the
ordinary disciplines of ordered cogitation.
But, before we break off, we should like
to revert to a theme upon which we seemed
about to embark at the beginning, that is the
matter of the Iliad, the Odyssey and the
Virgilian recension, the Aeneid, from which
most people have the story of the Iliad,
unless they depend on A. Pope. There is
little doubt, I suppose, that the Archaeologists
will succeed in producing fairly
conclusive evidence of a Greek expedition
across the Hellespont "in the dark backward
and abysm of time". Whether this was in
the pursuit of Beauty (not always an
aesthetic principle), or merely an Economic
war (are not all wars just that?) can
scarcely be proved. Yet, despite the kind of
mixed mortal-celestial parentage attributed
to many Greek V.I.Ps., we may safely
cow1t Helen as having "departed this life"
a long, long time ago; and the Economics of
that war, if any, will scarcely affect our
intention to enter "The Common Market".
But, the whole affair, real or imaginary,
still causes considerable furore in our
educational establishments and in the
examination papers that keep them in a
constant state of irritated frustration. It
also provides a rare pleasure to tens of
thousands who enjoy the story of the
alleged adventure in the Greek language,
and to tens of millions who enjoy it in a
variety of translations. But, hold! Have I
not slipped into the common mistake of
identifying the Iliad with the Economic
(or "Aesthetic"?) War which may have
occurred over three thousand years ago?
Yes, indeed! And the Iliad is not the
History of that War: it is a poem (later
labelled "Epic") written by Homer (Man,
or multitude) possibly Seven Hw1dred
Years after such events as those upon
which it is based-written on the basis of
a folk-tale! It is to Homer that the
Hundred Thousand Men are due, to him
the Thousand Ships and, perhaps, the
"Face that launched them"! What if his
" facts" came to him embedded in an oral
folk-saga? His was the addition and
multiplication that swelled it into a mighty
Epic-he was, apparently ignorant of
subtraction and division! Was his material
a more unlikely subject for Epic treatment
than the subject of the Táin Bó Cuailgne ,
the almost-epic of the Gaelic? Was it less
romantic to go on safari after the "Mrs.
Universe" of her day than after a Black
Bull, even though it were an "Irish Bull"?
Like the Dramatist, the Novelist and
even the Essayist, the Narrative Poet is
fundamentally a Storyteller; and, when
he has dressed it up, Homer tells a good
story. But there is more, a great deal more,
than that to it. Our friend Pope says, and
he always says well, that
The proper study of mankind is man,
and here in the Iliad, and again in the
Odyssey, you have it. There is not a facet
of Human Nature-good, bad or indifferent
-that is not well treated in these wide-ranging
narratives. In the Iliad, the deviations
and episodes are incidental to the
main theme and are all relative to the
event, or personage, under consideration,
such as arose at an Irish "Wake" in the
good (or bad) old days-talk about "his
mother's people", or the more astounding
thing that happened at such a Fair. The
Odyssey is the ancestor of all the Serials
written for periodical, screen and radio,
from "The Adventures of Sherlock
Holmes" to "The Kennedys of Castlerosse":
inevitably, the Sequel is not a patch
on the basic story, of course. But Construction
is a minor detail in comparison
with Emotion, Intellectual Control and
Imagination without which there is no
Art, and these Great Epics are Great Art.
It has been held that the "Epic" comes at
the End of a period of Literary Activity,
rather than at the Beginning or Middle;
and there is here no contradiction of that
theory, for, preceding Homer there must
have been among the Greeks a strong and
active habit of Storytelling which enshrined
myth and legend reaching back
into the mists of pre-history: the proofs of
it are found all over Greek literature.
Homer ended and crowned that period of
Oral Tradition (Bealoideas) with his two
Epics (or One, if you will); and it is an
awesome but pleasing thought that the
Beginnings of Western Europe's Literature
are themselves intrinsically
Great literature.
