During the Summer of 1961 the Holy Father, Pope John XXIII, sent Peter Gregory
Cardinal Agagianian to Ireland as his personal representative at the Patrician ceremonies
in Dublin. The enthusiastic reception of the Papal Legate was a criterion of Irish fidelity
to the Holy See.
The occasion was a reminder of another Papal Legate who came to Ireland under
less happy circumstances more than three centuries ago. In 1645 the Holy Father, Pope
Innocent X, named John Baptist Rinuccini, archbishop of Fermo, as Nuncio
Extraordinary to the Confederation of Kilkenny. Rinuccini landed at Kenmare in
south west Ireland and made his way, always under the protection of a heavy escort, to
Kilkenny.
There was a Pauline setting to his Irish odyssey. The Nuncio spent nearly four
years in journeying, often in perils of the sea, in perils of robbers, in perils of the city,
in perils from false brethren. Of course, the journey from Kenmare to Kilkenny was but
the prelude to the tremendous happenings of 1645-49.
The writer, accompanied by three friends, endeavoured to trace the path of the
Nuncio through three Irish counties, Kerry, Cork and Limerick. An interesting discovery
was made. In many of the places mentioned in the following pages, there is still a vivid
tradition of a Papal Legate who once passed that way-of a man whose name is indelibly
impressed on Irish history.
Rinuccini's mission to the Irish people bears a strong Capuchin interest. After his
return to his native land, the Nuncio commissioned an Irish Capuchin to write the entire
history of the Irish nunciature. Another Irish Capuchin was summoned to share in the
task. What was written in the seventeenth century was given to the world by another
Irish Capuchin in the twentieth century

The Lords spiritual and temporal and
the two hundred and twenty-six
commoners of the Confederation
who met at Kilkenny on 24 October, 1642,
made an unambiguous statement of the
supreme idealism which would animate
their united efforts during the forthcoming
years-Pro Deo, Rege et Patria Hiberni
Unanimes. Of course, the word Hiberni in
the context had a new connotation; it was
in fact a neologism. Previous generations
would not have agreed on the meaning of
the word nor would they have allowed the
possibility of Irishmen in concord. The
component elements of the inhabitants of
Ireland, Gael and Gall, expressed contempt,
one for the other, in such terms as "Saxon
churl," bodagh Sassanach, "the King's
Irish enemies," and "the mere Irish."
Although Sir John Davies devised legal
measures in 1612 to abolish the basis of
such unflattering descriptions, the first
positive steps towards national unity were
delayed for thirty years. The opportunity
presented itself on that October evening in
1642 when the Old Irish and the Anglo-Irish
proclaimed their newly found solidarity;
they were now Hiberni Unanimes or
Irishmen in concord.
John Baptist Rinuccini, archbishop
of Fermo, Italy; Papal Nuncio Extraordinary
to Ireland
There were two compelling motives.
Firstly, there was a desperate necessity,
recognised by all, to withstand the complete
confiscation of the land of Ireland.
Royal policy under James I and then under
his son, Charles I had an undisguised
objective-to convert Ireland to a crown
colony. Clearly in 1640 it mattered little
whether one belonged to the Five Bloods
or traced one's origins to the retinue of
the First Conquerors. The plantations of
Ulster, Connacht and Leinster took scant
account of racial ancestry. The nascent idea
of Irish nationalism gathered strength with
the rising of the men of Ulster in l641.
There was no gainsaying the obvious
truth- all Irishmen must unite or perish
forever.
More cogent was the religious motive.
Borlase and Parsons, the king's lords justices
in Ireland, were resolved to extirpate
Catholicism; their edicts against " all Papists
without distinction of any" were literally
understood by Sir Charles Coote and his
Puritans who boasted that they would not
leave a Catholic in the land! The Catholic
and Anglo-Irish lords of the Pale profited
of the lesson when two of their number,
Sir John Read and Patrick Barnewell,
were put to the torture in Dublin castle.
Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork, did not
distinguish between Old Irish and Anglo-Irish
when he commended his own son,
Lord Kinelmeaky, to the earl of Warwick:
"And now that the boy has blooded
himself upon them, I hope that God will
bless him, that as I now write but of the
killing of a hundred, I shall shortly write of
the killing of thousands." But Boyle's high
hopes were frustrated; the youth of ill-omen
was killed at the siege of Liscarroll,
County Cork, in the first phase of the war.
There was timely opportunism in the
synod of the Irish bishops held at Kilkenny
in May 1642; they drew the bond of
association between the Catholic Irish. The
national idea drew its first breath and all
Irishmen braced themselves for the intensification
of the struggle.
Envoys of the Confederation hastened to
the courts of Europe. In France Cardinal
Richelieu released Irish soldiers in the
French service and promised a subsidy of a
million crowns. Philip IV of Spain was
early to help when a Spanish frigate docked
at Dungarvan bearing £ 3,000 sterling in
plate and coin as well as the essential
weapons of war. At Rome Father Luke
Wadding, agent of the Confederates,
pleaded successfully for the appointment of
a pro-Nuncio. Urban VIII sent Father
Francesco Scarampo, priest of the oratory
of Saint Philip Neri, as bearer of a jubilee
indulgence and of the pontifical blessing
on the armies of the Confederation. More
tangible tools of war were unloaded from
Scarampo's ship at Wexford: firelocks,
pikes and swords from the steel forges of
Milan.
Notwithstanding foreign sympathy for
the grand cause of Ireland, the national idea
born of the Confederation was proved to
be a pallid concept. There is little need here
to trace the divided loyalites and clashing
interests which gradually split the Confederation
asunder. The evil genius of the
piece was James Butler, Marquis of
Ormond. [note: James Butler, later first duke of Ormond, was the eldest son of Thomas, Viscount Thurles, and his wife, Elizabeth Poyntz, daughter of Sir John Poyntz, an English recusant under Elizabeth. Viscount Thurles was drowned off Skerries in 1619; his son, James, was declared a ward of court and was educated in England. Thus he was imbued with implacable hostility to the Catholic Church. Elizabeth, Lady Thurles, married, secondly, Captain George Mathew of Radyr, Glamorganshire. Among her direct descendants through her second marriage were Nano Nagle, foundress of the Presentation Sisters, and Father Mathew, the apostle of temperance. Another descendant was Christopher Butler, archbishop of Cashel 1712-57.] His only loyalties were to the
English crown and Protestantism. Loyalty
to the Stuart monarchy was shared to a
greater or lesser degree by the Catholic
lords of the pale and the Anglo-Irish
nobility of the provinces. With the Old
Irish there was one iron resolution- to win
freedom for the Church. The problems of
the Stuart dynasty were remote.
After some initial reverses fortune smiled
on the arms of the Confederates. The day
of reckoning seemed to have come for the
Puritans and the invading Scots when
Owen Roe O'Neill, now in command of a
well-equipped army, defeated Munroe at
Portlester, son1e six miles west of Trim, on
11 September, 1643. Suddenly, Ormond
proposed a truce-to last for a year. And
he committed a formidable Irish force to
fight for the king of England on English
soil.
Obviously, a new stimulus was sorely
needed to revitalise the Confederation, to
recapture the soaring idealism of October,
1642. Sir Richard Bellings, secretary of the
supreme council, made his way to Rome
early in 1645 and reported to the Holy See
on the Irish stalemate. Innocent X, recently
elected Pope, agreed to Wadding's suggestion
that a nuncio with plenary powers
should be sent to Ireland. Thus was
introduced into the current of Irish history
the name of John Baptist Rinuccini,
archbishop of Fermo, a city some thirty
Estuary of the Roughty river at Kenmare, Co. Kerry, where the Nuncio
and his party landed
miles south east of Ancona, near the
Adriatic coast.[note: John Baptist Rinuccini was born in 1592, son of Camillo Rinuccini, a Florentine patrician. He studied at the Propaganda college and at the universities of Bologna and Perugia and practised canon law at Rome. In 1625 he was consecrated archbishop of Fermo. ] Accompanied by his secretary,
Dionisio Massari, dean of Fermo,
Rinuccini landed near the modern town of
Kenmare on 22 October, 1645. The
Nuncio's conduct of affairs is amply
documented. [note: After his return to Fermo, Rinuccini commissioned Father Richard O'Ferrall, former guardian of the Capuchin friary at Galway, to write the history of the Irish nunciature. Father Robert O'Connell, also an Irish Capuchin, came to the assistance of Father O'Ferrall in the gigantic task. At an early stage Father O'Ferrall died; the work was completed in 1666 by Father O'Connell. The entire ms. (destroyed during the war) has been edited for the Irish Manuscripts Commission by Father Stanislaus Kavanagh, O.F.M.Cap., under the somewhat forbidding title Commentarius Rinuccinianus.]  Much less known is Massari's
impressionistic narrative which tells of early
days and weeks in Ireland. [note: The Relazione of Massari was published in English translation under the title My Irish Campaign in the Catholic Bulletin, VI-X, 1916-25. Extracts were printed by Moran in app. I of Persecutions of Irish Catholics.]  His vivid
picture of social customs and manners,
witnessed in Kerry and Cork, is a memorable
travelogue. The background of scenic
glory which so captivated Massari is
familiar to all who have journeyed along
the roads of South Kerry and West Cork.
II
Notwithstanding his eager acceptance of
the post of secretary to the Irish embassy,
Massari did not conceal his fear of the
perils that awaited him. He tells that in
boyhood his imagination was fired by his
uncle's tales of travel in foreign lands-in
Poland and in Tartary. Only now when he
was forty-eight years old was his youthful
ambition to be gratified. But Ireland was a
far away land on the north-western fringe
of Europe whence he might never return.
On the day, therefore, on which he received
the formal invitation to accompany the
Nuncio to Ireland, Massari went to the
Capuchin friary at Fermo and in the
presence of the guardian, Father John
Francis of Ortezzano, he made a solemn
dedication of his life to the service of Holy
Church. He fortified his soul with the
reception of the Sacraments and then he
adds, rather naively, that he secured his
worldly credit by raising a loan of four
hundred crowns. At the shrine of Our
Lady of Loreto he invoked the blessing and
protection of the Mother of God and then,
on 28 March, 1645, he joined Rinuccini at
Florence.
There is clear evidence of the importance
attached to Rinuccini's embassy by the
courts of Europe. The Apostolic Nuncio
and his staff were received with formal
ceremony at Genoa by Cardinal Durazzo,
the Doge and Senate. The Genoese provided
the galley which conveyed the party
to Cannes. When the embassy landed on
French soil, Invirnizi, archpriest of Milan,
member of the Nuncio's suite, was commissioned
to go to Flanders to acquire two
frigates for the voyage to Ireland.
Massari carefully chronicled the journey
through France. The road to Paris lay
through Avignon, Lyons and Fontainebleau.
The significance of the embassy to
Ireland was recognised by the Catholics of
France. Massari notes happily the enthusiastic
reception of the Nuncio by cathedral and
civic bodies. At Lyons, however, there was
evidence of hostility where "the heretics
of these parts and indeed of all France were
observing a fast that failure might dog the
steps and attend the labours of the Apostolic
Nuncio to Ireland." Some ten miles from
Paris Rinuccini was met by Monsignor dei
Bagni, Nuncio to France, and a ceremonial
entry to the capital was made in two
carriages, each drawn by six horses. In the
afternoon, Anne of Austria, the queen
regent, and her son, the boy-king, Louis
XIV, met the travellers. Massari was
delighted when the young king stood
bareheaded in the presence of the Nuncio
to Ireland. From all sides came assurances
of help, from the king, from Cardinal
Mazarin and from the Prince de Conde.
Although Rinuccini bore letters from Pope
Innocent X to Henrietta Marie, Queen of
England, then resident in her native
France, the queen's failure to observe protocol
prevented a meeting between her and
the Nuncio. The duty of presenting the
letters was committed to the secretary and
Massari did not fail to observe the heretical
and Ormondist influences which surrounded
the wife of Charles Stuart of
England. On the journey from Paris to the
coast, the Nuncio met the first of many
disappointments. At Orleans he was informed
that the two warships promised by
Mazarin would not now be made available.
Worse followed ; the frigates purchased in
Flanders by Invernizi had been lost at sea
with all on board.
There is a note of urgency in Massari's
narrative at this point. Time was pressing
and there were instructions from the Holy
See to expedite the voyage to Ireland.
English spies were numerous in Flanders
who sent reports to London on the movements
of the Nuncio. Knowing that he was
under observation, Rinuccini made a
sudden change of plan. Massari was despatched
to Paimboeuf in Brittany to
purchase a ship. A frigate, the San Pietro,
carrying twelve guns, was acquired and
loaded with supplies of war-4,000 muskets,
4,000 swords, 2,000 pikeheads, 300 brace of
pistols and nearly ten tons of gunpowder.
Even in the Breton seaport, agents of the
Puritan parliament tried to foil the Nuncio's
plans. A determined effort was made by an
English man-of-war carrying thirty-eight
guns to ram the San Pietro but the attempt
was defeated. Intelligence reached the
Nuncio that English ships lay in waiting on
the high seas. There was an offer to supply a
convoy of Irish ships but Rinuccini decided
that an unescorted vessel would attract less
attention. At La Rochelle on 16 October,
1645, the San Pietro unfurled her sails and
set course for Ireland. On board, in
addition to the Nuncio and his staff, were
Sir Richard Bellings, secretary to the
supreme council of the Confederation,
Edmond O'Dwyer, co-adjutor bishop of
Limerick, along with a hundred passengers.
When three days' sailing out from La
Rochelle, the lookout reported that eight
English warships were bearing down but
after a chase of four hours the swift frigate
outdistanced her pursuers. Next day, however,
another and much speedier warship
was descried and identified as that under
the command of a renegade Irishman
named Plunket who was in the pay of the
parliament. The pursuit was hot for nine
hours. Plunket closed in and preparations
were made on board the San Pietro to resist
the boarding that seemed inevitable. Arms
were distributed, valuable papers were
held in readiness to be thrown overboard.
To save the Nuncio from capture and
death Rinuccini and Massari made a last
minute arrangement whereby they were to
exchange identities. When all seemed to be
lost fire broke out on board the warship
and Plunket was obliged to slacken sail.
The San Pietro escaped by sailing with the
wind for many miles off course. Only when
he had put in at Kinsale was Plunket made
aware that the prize which had escaped
him bore the papal embassy to Ireland,
Nuncio and all. Massari wrote delightedly
that "Plunket is said to have dashed his
head several times against the wall in his
rage at having let such a glorious chance
slip through his fingers." For more than a
day the San Pietro was tossed by gales and
lost in fog. At length, Clear island on the
southwest coast of Cork loomed up;
Dursey island was rounded and on the
evening of 21 October, in the words of
Massari, "we caught our first glimpse of the
welcome hills of Ireland." The San Pietro
sailed to safety on the calm and sheltered
waters of Kenmare bay. A decision was
made to put the Nuncio ashore at once.
III
The Capuchin authors of the Commentarius
give little data which would help
us to identify the exact place where
Rinuccini first set foot on Irish soil. The
omission is surprising when we remember
that Father Robert O'Connell, the author-in-
chief, was a native of Ballycarbery, near
the modern town of Cahirciveen. One is
tempted to think that the Nuncio disembarked
at Dunkerron castle, stronghold of
the O'Sullivan Mór, but the Commentarius
and Massari's narrative indicate that the
immediate destination of the Nuncio was
Ardtully castle, home of the MacFineen
MacCarthys, some five miles up river from
the modern town of Kenmare. Hence the
tenor of both historical accounts of the
landing proves convincingly that Rinuccini
disembarked on the northern bank of the
Kenmare estuary. The Commentarius is
specific on one point: the San Pietro cast
anchor in midstream when navigation was
made difficult by rocky shoals. Then the
Nuncio was rowed ashore in a light boat or
Skiff. [note: It is difficult to determine the exact place where the Nuncio disembarked. A relevant detail is the draught of the San Pietro. Mr. A. H. Waite, deputy curator of Models and Relics, National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, -states that a French-built frigate of the period, carrying twelve guns, would have drawn ten to twelve feet of water. The Admiralty chart shows that today in the channel between Illaungowla and Denish island there is a uniform depth of three fathoms. Approaching the bridge at Kenmare, off Dunkerron east, the reading is 1 1/2 fathoms; at the sound the reading is four fathoms. Clearly at the present time a frigate comparable to the San Pietro could not sail above the bridge. Mackenzie's chart (S. W . Coast of Ireland-Survey, 1763-64) does not show significant variations of depth. In fact, he shows a depth of three fathoms at the sound. On the other hand, the Commentarius states that the frigate sailed up the estuary until dangerous shoals made navigation hazardous; then the Nuncio was put ashore. The first dangerous shoal may have been Stay Bank or the mussel bed in close proximity to the present bridge at Kenmare. According to the Petty-Fitzmaurice papers there was a bridge on the site of the present bridge in 1790. Earlier in the eighteenth century there was a bridge at Anagerah, in the townland of Cahir, less than a mile upstream. We presume there was no bridge to obstruct the San Pietro in 1645. We conclude, therefore, that the Nuncio landed near the present northern terminal of the bridge over the sound at Kenmare. Massari wrote that on the following day the frigate sailed further upstream ; the final anchorage was again in midstream. He adds the interesting fact that the anchorage was where "the tongue of the sea became too narrow." A possible anchorage was between the promontory of Reenagross on the northern side and Sheen Falls on the southern bank. It is unthinkable that the frigate sailed to Poulacahalane or Gortalinny pool. One must bear in mind that the felling of timber on the mountain sides accelerated the silting of river estuaries. In the Kenmare estuary the process of silting was hastened in the latter part of the seventeenth century by the denudation of the surrounding mountains by Sir William Petty to obtain timber for his smelting forges.] Thus did Rinuccini enter upon a
Gaelic world in which he was destined to
play a vital part for almost four years.
A cultured Florentine ecclesiastic felt the
first shock of strangeness and surprise at the
stately fabric of a civilisation which he had
come to save. There were scenes of
tumultuous joy and overpowering
welcome. Shelter and rest for the night
were provided in a shepherd's mud cabin.
Massari wrote a graphic page: [note: Persecutions, p. 485.] 
He [the Nuncio] was conducted to
some huts of shepherds or fishermen;
and there his usual bed being prepared
for him, he, through the blessing of God,
rested very well during the night, which
he had not been able to do during the
six preceding days of our voyage. On
the following day I went from the
frigate to salute him, and having found
him in a poor hut, I could not refrain
from remarking that, as the Irish had
looked forward for his arrival with as
much anxiety as the Jews for the promised
Messias, it was only meet that in imitation
of his Divine Master his first abode
should be in the huts of shepherds.
The courtesy of the poor people,
amongst whom my lord Nuncio took up
his quarters, was indescribable. A fat
bullock, two sheep and a porker were
instantly slaughtered, and an abundant
supply of beer, butter and milk was
brought to him.
The grounds of Ardtully castle, Co. Kerry
Meanwhile the San Pietro with Massari
on board edged its way slowly upstream to
within some three miles of Ardtully.
Already Donough MacFineen MacCarthy,
with an escort of two companies of
soldiers, had conducted the Nuncio to the
castle of Ardtully. It was now Massari's
turn to fall under the spell of the magic
which is Kerry: [note: Cath. Bulletin, VI, p. 217.] 
As I stood lost in admiration of the
marvellous beauty that nature had
wrought in this place, I suddenly found
myself surrounded by more than four
hundred persons, and imagining they
were heretics I thought for a moment I
was a lost man; but soon I found they
were all fine Catholics, men, women,
and children, who had gathered in from
the surrounding districts. They formed a
circle round me, and detained me till
each one had kissed the crucifix I wore
on my breast. They showed me many
signs of kindness and affection, lifting up
their arms to heaven in token of welcome
and of thanksgiving to God for our safe
arrival.
They then led me with gentle violence
to a cabin situated in the depths of a
wood where I was welcomed by a
matron of grave and noble appearance
and of most courteous bearing. I was at
once put to sit on two feather pillows and
I may confess that as I sat down I
thought for a moment the ground had
given way beneath me. I was then
handed a generous noggin of fresh milk
and, whether it was owing to thirst or
to the excellency of the beverage, I took
a second drink of it with infinite relish.
All present knew how to make the
sign of the cross, and there was not a
child even of the tenderest years but could
recite in Latin the Our Father, the Hail
Mary and the Creed. Fortunately there
was one among them who knew Spanish
and he not only interpreted what they
were saying in the Irish tongue but also
conveyed my answers to them to their
evident satisfaction.
Even after many hours I had great
difficulty in tearing myself away from
them, and then all insisted on accompanying
me to the waterside. On the way they
let me see that they regarded it as a
privilege to attend me, give me a hand
over the difficult places, or even touch the
hem of my garments. Some would not
part with me till they had waded some
distance into the water, while there were
others who, in a small boat of their own,
came with me as far as the frigate and,
having asked to see the room which the
Nuncio had occupied, they set to kiss
it all over in token of their great devotion
and reverence for the Holy Apostolic
See.
At Ardtully castle, the ruins of which
may still be seen about a mile on the
western side of the village of Kilgarvan,
Rinuccini was formally received by
Donough MacFineen MacCarthy and his
wife, Catherine, daughter of Lord Muskery
of Macroom castle. Forthwith, Rinuccini
wrote a letter of safe arrival to Innocent X,
the text of which is quoted in the Commentarius.
[note: Com. Rin. ii, p. 8.] 
News of the Nuncio's arrival was soon
spread throughout Kerry and Cork. Visits
of courtesy were paid by the O'Sullivan
Mór of Dunkerron, the O'Sullivans of
Beara and Bantry, the O'Keeffes of
Dromagh and the O' Callaghans of Clonmeen.
Part of the cargo in the hold of the
San Pietro was unloaded and deposited in
Ardtully castle. Then the frigate put to sea
again to deliver the remaining supplies at
Limerick.
After a stay of two or three days the
Nuncio and his retinue resumed their
journey eastwards to the castle of Lord
Muskery at Macroom. Their road lay
along the valley of the Roughty river
passing through some of the most majestic
and romantic scenery of south Kerry.
The splendour of the Roughty valley
with mighty Mangerton towering overhead
must stir regrets that no traveller
has arisen to capture the poetry and
history of our Irish roads. How an Irish
Chaucer would have made imperishable
literature of his pilgrim jogging to the
Skellig of Saint Michael, once a centre of
medieval pilgrimage, that springs from
the ocean on the horizon to stand sentry
on the very outpost of Europe. The roadside
musings of an Irish George Borrow
would have spanned centuries when he
stood at Kilgarvan and surveyed the
battlefield of Callan where, in 1261, the
resurgent and triumphant Gaelic hosts laid
low the flower of Anglo-Norman chivalry.
Would that another Belloc had strode
purposefully along the by-roads "half as
old as time" that show the way southwards
across the mountains to the shrine of
Saint Finbarr at Gougane Barra! But in
our modern age speedy travel leaves little
time for evocation of the storied countryside.
More's the pity!
One wonders if Rinuccini suspected that
he, too, was beginning a memorable
chapter of history on that morning in late
October, 1645, when, flanked by a mounted
troop of the MacFineen MacCarthys, he
rode deeper into Munster.
A modern road map indicates clearly
Morley's bridge at the approaches to
Kilgarvan. Here just across the Roughty
river a road rises gently to the pass of
Cum-na-nEug. Through the pass, a road
leads to the mouth of the Glen and Aghras;
an alternative route descends to the valley
of Coolea. But such roads mostly date to
the middle years of the last century. The
Rinuccini cavalcade in 1645 crossed the
Roughty at a point some two miles above
or east of Morley's bridge near Inchee. A
narrow mountain path bites deeply into the
shale and yellow clay to scale Cum-na-nEug.
There is a thrill of discovery when
one descries a hardly visible sinewy track
at the foot of Foill an tsean-caisleain
beneath Re an Phobail. It disappears only
to reappear in the lowlands at a ford where
now stands Ballyfineen bridge. Having
crossed the ford Rinuccini and his escort
rode through Lomanach and then eastwards
along the line of the modern road
Slightly left of centre is
seen the winding path of
Cum na nEug
to the parish church of Coolea. Here the
old road swung uphill to Gortnagros, to
the Bona Ban and then downhill to the
ancient shrine of Saint Gobinet at Ballyvourney.
Once more the Nuncio was
housed in a shepherd's hut in which,
Massari tells us, a huge fire was built to
keep out the great cold of the Derrynasaggart
mountains. Next morning
Rinuccini celebrated Mass in the now
ruinous medieval church of Saint Gobinet.
And then on to Macroom.
Again one must puzzle out and discover
the roads of the seventeenth century. The
present-day route from Saint Gobinet's to
Macroom passes through Ballymakeera and
eastwards close by the historic castle of the
MacCarthys of Muskery at Carrigaphooka.
Rinuccini's itinerary turned northwards at
Coolavookig along the now barely recognisable
Bothar na Re to Clondrohid.
Somewhere near Clondrohid a mounted
troop under the command of Cormac, the
eleven years old son of Lord Muskery,
awaited the Nuncio.[note: Donough MacCarthy, Lord Muskery, was commander of the Confederate army in Munster. He was the last of the Confederate leaders to surrender to the Cromwellian forces; he defended R oss castle, Killarney, against Ludlow in 1652. Muskery followed the Stuarts into exile when his lands were expropriated in the Cromwellian settlement. He was created Earl of Clancarthy by Charles II in 1658. At the restoration, Muskery was restored to his estates. The Cromwellian grantee, Sir William Penn, was given property near Youghal as compensation. Penn's son, William, was the founder of the state of Pennsylvania. Cormac was the eldest son of Lord Muskery and his second wife, Ellen Butler, sister of the Marquis of Ormond. After the restoration of the Stuarts in 1660 Cormac entered the English navy. He was killed on the Royal Charles in 1665 in a naval action against the Dutch fleet under Van Opden and buried in Westminster abbey. Diarmuid MacCarthy, the Cork poet, composed an elegy on the death of Muskery and of his son Cormac: Och Mo Threighid.]
IV
The kaleidoscopic scene in the square
before the gates of Macroom castle finds
no mention in the Commentarius but was
faithfully recorded by Massari. The secretary
sensed the importance of the occasion
when the Nuncio became the honoured
guest of the Lady Muskery. The piety of
the noble lady and her sterling fidelity to
the faith of her fathers were in contrast to
the venomous hostility of her brother,
James, Marquis of Ormond, then viceroy
of Ireland. Secret instructions from the
Holy See had warned Rinuccini against the
machinations of Ormond who was prepared
to sacrifice the Confederate cause to
serve Charles Stuart of England. The same
aide-memoir told that Ormond had certainly
been born of Catholic parents, had been a
Catholic until his sixteenth year, was then
sent to England and educated at court
where he imbibed Lutheran doctrine. But
Massari was not yet prepared to peer too
far into the future. At Macroom he was
captivated by the liturgical reception given
by the clergy, the vociferous welcome by
the people and the humble courtesy of
Lady Muskery when with her children and
surrounded by her household she knelt at
the castle gates to receive the Nuncio's
blessing. In Massari's words: [note: Cath. Bulletin, loc. cit., p. 219.] 
Some three miles distant from the
castle we were met by the Viscount's
son with fifty well-appointed horse; and,
not far from the stream that flows
beneath the castle walls, by a squadron
of infantry. A few paces away the
clergy, secular and regular, with a
Ruins of the medieval
church of Saint Cabinet
at Ballyvourney, Co.
Cork
processional cross were waiting in readiness
to receive the Apostolic Nuncio as
suitably as the circumstances of a rural
district permitted. A procession was
formed and proceeded to the church
situated in the square outside the castle
gate. Having recited the usual prayers,
the Nuncio imparted his blessing to a
large congregation there assembled. This
done, he went on foot towards the
castle, at the gate of which he was
The building on the left is the ruins of Macroom castle, where Lady Muskery
welcomed Rinuccini and his suite
received by the Viscountess (in the
absence of the Viscount, then in Dublin
with his brother-in-law, the Marquis of
Ormond, who was Viceroy at that
time).
Kneeling down with her children and
all the household the noble lady begged
the Nuncio's blessing, welcomed him
to the castle, and then showed him to the
well-appointed and scrupulously clean
state-room prepared for him, his Excellency
returning her courtesy by attending
her to the door of her apartments.
The Nuncio had cause to rejoice that
the kingdom in these parts was provided
with such comforts and inhabited by
such civil people. The lady was sister to
the Marquis of Ormond, and, thank God,
a Catholic like all her family, however
great a heretic her brother might be. She
was a lady of noble bearing, accomplished
and exceedingly tactful, well and wisely
able to take her place and sustain her
authority as lady of the house.
As for myself I gave thanks to God that
I had a bed to sleep in after those forty
days during which I had to lie in my
clothes on the bare ground or on boards
or straw, partly owing to the limited
facilities at my disposal during the
journey, and partly out of a sense of
consideration for my travelling companions
whose unaccustomed privations
I thought it right to share.
At Macroom Rinuccini had his first
meeting with four members of the supreme
council of the Confederation and so had his
earliest opportunity of appraising the
situation in Ireland. Few were better
qualified than Richard O'Connell, bishop
of Ardfert, to report on the state of religion
amongst the people and their determination
to resist Puritanism to the last. At Macroom,
also, Rinuccini met the Franciscan friar,
Father Boetius MacEgan, whose constancy
and heroic death are part of the Irish
Franciscan tradition. In the turmoil of
later years MacEgan was an unswerving
supporter of the Nuncio and by him was
consecrated bishop of Ross. In 1650
McEgan was captured by Broghill and
brought to Carrigadrohid, near Macroom,
where the castle was under heavy siege.
The friar was strangled with the reins of his
own horse; his dying words were a call to
the beleaguered garrison to fight to the end.
Prior to his departure from Macroom,
the Nuncio celebrated a public Mass in the
square before the castle gates. So great was
the surging press of the congregation from
the neighbouring districts that a guard of
soldiers was called to protect him. The
question of the route to be followed to
Kilkenny brought the first division of
opinion. Bellings, who had accompanied
the Nuncio from France, secretary to the
supreme council, had designs to introduce
the Nuncio at places where the current of
opinion was unfavourable to the Old Irish.
But the prudent counsels of Boetius
MacEgan prevailed; the decision was made
to continue the journey through the
territory of the friendly chiefs of the
MacCarthys. The cavalcade retraced its
path to Clondrohid and then turned in a
northerly direction passing near the
MacCarthy castle at Kilmeedy, thence along
the base of Clara mountain, now known
as Mount Leader, and so to Millstreet.
The Blackwater was crossed at the ford
now marked by Keale bridge. Less than
three miles away was the castle of Drumsecane,

The imposing gateway to Macroom castle, before which the Nuncio celebrated a
public Mass prior to his departure
Ruins of the Mac Carthy castle at
Kilmeedy, Co. Cork
the home of Dorrough MacCarthy,
a chieftain of the MacDonough and
Duhallow MacCarthys. [note: 11 The Compleat Irish Traveller, a work published in 1788, describes the castle at Drumsecane: it had a central tower, flanking or curtain walls, and four corner turrets. To-day only the remains of two turrets and a curtain wall remain. On the opposite bank of the Blackwater is the castle of Drishane, another castle of the Duhallow MacCarthys, now in the grounds of the well-known girls' school conducted by the Dames of Saint Maur.] Here a strong
escort of two companies of horse awaited
Rinuccini. In charge of the cavalry was
Colonel Richard Butler, brother to the
Marquis of Ormond and described by the
authors of the Commentarius as "a most
excellent Catholic." Other emissaries of the
supreme council at Drumsecane were
Viscount Netterville of Dowth and Father
Nicholas Taylor. Another arrival was
Signor Domenico Spinola, a Genoese
nobleman, whose name appears many
times in the Commentarius and in Massari’s
pages. Spinola served the Nuncio, sometimes
as treasurer and sometimes as diplomatic
messenger.
Hospitality awaited the embassy at yet
another castle of one of the leading Catholic
families of County Cork-the O'Callaghans
of Clonmeen, some few miles west of
Mallow. Half a day's journey brought the
Nuncio and his escort to the castle of
Donough O' Callaghan on the southern
bank of the Blackwater. O' Callaghan's
ancient lineage is heavily emphasised in the
Commentarius. [note: The O'Callaghans were the senior Eoghanacht family. The antiquity of the O'Callaghan sept is 
also emphasised in the elegy Ar Bhas Uí Cheallachain by Aodhagan Ó Rathaille. The subject of the elegy was Domhnall O'Callaghan, grandson of the Donaugh O'Callaghan of Clonmeen who entertained Rinuccini in 1645.]
The verdant lands of the Blackwater
valley presented a striking contrast to the
rugged magnificence of south Kerry.
With keen observation Rinuccini and
Massari described the pastoral beauty of
the vast plain between the Blackwater and
the Ballyhoura hills. Their comments are
set down in the Commentarius: [note: 13  Com. Rin. ii, p. 19. The country described in this passage leads to the conclusion that Rinuccini and his cavalcade made the journey from Drumsecane to Clonmeen along the northern bank of the Blackwater. We surmise that the river was crossed at the ford at Ballymaquirke. The Down Survey (1683) suggests a crossing place at this point, some four miles from Clonmeen. On the other hand, the river was fordable at Roskeen, two miles west of Clonmeen.]
The country through which we
travelled, although it was situated between
mountains, was of pleasing prospect and
abounded in the richest pastures. Long
valleys were met, dotted with groves
and woods which not too high nor too
dense added to the beauty of the landscape
rather than detracted from it.
We continued through more than
seventy miles of this type of country.
Once emerged from the mountains we
entered upon a great plain fringed with
probably correct. The possibility of encountering
hostile elements nude speed
necessary and perhaps the rapidity of
movement explains the summary character
of Massari's account. Mallow, a centre of
communications and an obvious crossing of
the Blackwater, was by-passed well to the
west; the most likely crossing was the
ford at Roskeen, near Lombardstown.
Two years previously the marauding forces
of Inchiquin and Broghill would have
made a journey through north Cork very
Keale Bridge which replaces the ford where the Rinuccini entourage crossed the
River Blackwater near Millstreet, Co. Cork
hills and valleys of wondrous beauty.
They were well cultivated and rich in
herds, especially cattle and sheep. From
the latter is obtained wool of the finest
texture which is misnamed English wool.
At this stage Massari's narrative does not
allow an exact tracing of the Nuncio's
itinerary northwards to Kilmallock. But
our conjectural reconstruction is very
hazardous but of late greater success had
attended Confederate arms. Thus the great
fortress at Liscarroll was now in friendly
hands. Nevertheless, the Nuncio went
warily; he wrote, "I travelled with great
circumspection, often times leaving the
high roads, posting sentinels about at night,
sending spies on before, and taking, in fact,
all the precautions necessary in war".
We conclude, therefore, that the Nuncio
and his escort rode through Castlemagner,
Liscarroll and on to the territory of the
Barrys at Ballyhea. Two miles ahead lay
Charleville, also in the hands of the Confederates.
Thence several roads lay open
across the plain of south Limerick to the
medieval municipality of the earls of
Desmond at Kilmallock.
All that remains of
Drumsecane castle, a
turret and part of the
fortification wall
v
Surely few towns in Munster, or in
Ireland, have preserved the mien and
memory of history better than Kilmallock.
At the medieval gateway, now in Emmet
Street, and for some obscure reason named
the Blossom Gate, one finds ready composition
of place for Massari's description
of the reception of the Nuncio by the
secular clergy and Dominicans of Kilmallock.
The procession wended its way
along the present Sarsfield Street where
still stands one of the castle homes of
Gerald, the Great Earl of Desmond, the
mightiest - and most tragic - of the
Geraldine race. Here there was direct
entry to the great collegiate church of
Kilmallock. Even to-day the roofless ruin
with its flanking round tower epitomizes a
thousand years of history. One can pinpoint
the spot before the high altar where
Rinuccini faced the people and imparted
his blessing. The Nuncio and Massari had
hospitality of the Dominicans whose home
was hardby on the opposite bank of the
Lubagh river. The foundation was made in
1291 and was for long the cherished
religious house of the earls of Desmond.
O'Heyne, the Dominican historian in the
early eighteenth century, tells of the
heroism and fortitude of the friars. Their
ruined friary, with its graceful campanile,
its blank windows, their stone tracery
is still a marvel of the craftsman's skill,
make the ghostly scene of Rinuccini's
arrival, more than three centuries ago,
seem to be somehow not too far from
reality.
The data in Massari's narrative and in
the Commentarius is insufficient to reconstruct
exactly the intervening stages or
intervals in the Nuncio's journey through
Munster. The halt at Kilmallock, however,
was necessarily brief because of a sudden
change of plan. Recent happenings made it
imperative that he should now include
Limerick, twenty miles away, in his
itinerary. Hitherto, the influence of
O'Brien, earl of Thomond, had ensured the
neutrality of Limerick towards the Confederation.
To the dismay of the supreme
council, Thomond permitted the Puritans
to place a garrison in his castle of Bunratty. [note: Massari described Bunratty castle, near Limerick, as the most beautiful residence he had seen in Ireland. He wrote that it was a palace fit for an emperor. In the following year (1646) the Nuncio was present at the siege and re-capture of Bunratty castle from the Parliamentarians.]
Piers Creagh, mayor, assured the council
that the Puritans would be resisted. The
news of Rinuccini's arrival was the probable
cause of the city's declaration for the
Confederation. In the Nuncio's own phrase,
the detour to Limerick would cement the
union.
Massari recorded the pageantry of the
occasion. Three miles from Limerick some
regiments were drawn up in military
formation. Behind them waited the mayor,
magistrates and other prominent citizens.
The people knelt in the roadway and with
outstretched hands begged the Nuncio's
Castle of the Earl of Desmond at
Kilmallock, Co. Limerick
blessing. Taking his place under a canopy
borne by a priest, Rinuccini walked in
procession towards the city. Within the
gates Richard Arthur, bishop of Limerick,
now in his hundredth year, knelt to
receive the pontifical benediction. [note: The Commentarius describes Bishop Arthur as an octogenarian. Brady, (Episcopal Succession), says Arthur died on 23 May, 1646, age 100 years.]
Returning
to his cathedral church by a
shorter route, the aged bishop met the
Nuncio at the porch. Then occurred a
memorable incident which has been carefully
described in the Commentarius. The
venerable prelate offered his episcopal
insignia, mitre and crozier, to the representative
of the Holy Father with the
words: "These I have received from the
Catholic Church; readily I now surrender
them to the same Church."
At Limerick there was a meeting with the
Oratorian, Father Scarampo, who had been
papal envoy to the Confederation since
1643. There was much to discuss, much to
arrange, much to report; all that had
befallen the embassy since its departure
from France were duly transmitted to the
Holy See in two letters. Five days later the
journey was resumed. Travelling via Cashel,
the Nuncio entered Kilkenny, city of the
Confederation, on 12 November, 1645,
twenty-one days after his landing at
Kenmare. And so John Baptist Rinuccini,
archbishop of Fermo, took his place as the
central figure in one of the most stirring
epochs of Irish history.
VI
The stay of five days at Limerick gave
members of the embassy an opportunity of
sending letters to Italy. Rinuccini and
Massari were too astute observers of men
and manners not to have brought under
their shrewd notice the characteristics,
virtues, customs, foibles and failings of the
Irish. Massari gave a lengthy account of
his first impressions to Thomas Rinuccini,
brother of the Nuncio, senator of Florence
and minister at the court of Ferdinand,
Grand Duke of Tuscany. There was very
friendly comment on the men of Munster.[note: 16  Com. Rin., ii, p. 19.] 
The men are of handsome appearance,
possessing incredible strength, very fleet
of foot and they endure hardship of every
kind with indescribable patience. All are
accustomed to the use of arms, especially
at the present time of war. They who
follow literary pursuits become most
learned; some are skilled in every
science and every department of
knowledge.
Irishwomen, their mode of dress, their
extraordinarily large families and healthy
children were of absorbing interest to the
secretary.
The women excel in grace and beauty
to a remarkable degree. They exhibit
comeliness with singular modesty and
charm so that they display complete
open-mindedness and engage in social
intercourse without provoking any comment
or misgiving.
They dress themselves in a fashion
different from ours and which, in some
respects, resembles that of the French.
Almost all of them, moreover, are clad
in cloaks which reach to the ankles.
These cloaks are adorned with pendent
tassels, tufted like human hair; the
tassels being attached to the garment
where you would expect the collar, so
that it resembles a pallium. They go
without any other kind of head-dress;
all are content to wear a linen fillet tied
about almost in the manner of the
Greeks, so that their natural beauty
shines forth.
They bear many children. All are
married and blessed with large families.
Some have as many as thirty children,
all living, but the number of those who
have fifteen or twenty is exceedingly
large. All the children are naturally
beautiful, of good stature and healthy;
they are mostly auburn with a white and
rosy complexion.
We may assume that Massari's desscription
of food and meals in Ireland is
based largely on his experience of the
hospitality that was given him in the
castles of Ardtully, Macroom, Drumsecane
and Clonmeen.
They cook the most superb meals of
flesh meat and fish and they have a
most plentiful supply of both. They are
continually pledging each other's health,
drinking Spanish wine, French claret, a
delicious beer and milk of excellent
quality.
Fruit in use in Ireland is named: apples,
pears, plums and artichokes. Fish, saltwater
and fresh-water, is plentiful and
savoury: pike, herring, salmon and trout.
In addition, there are pilchards and oysters.
There is superlative comment on Irish
horses: they are noble and beautiful, sturdy
and swift. Massari marvelled at the cheapness
of food and horses in Ireland in
contrast to the prices in his native land.
Fondness for tobacco is characteristic of
Irishmen. Many tributes were paid to
Father Scarampo who had preceded the
Nuncio in Ireland. To Irishmen Father
Ruins of the Collegiate
chapel of Saints Peter
and Paul, Kilmallock
Scarampo's crowning virtue was-addiction
to tobacco; in their opinion he was now
a real Irishman !
While Massari had frank admiration for
the social virtues of Irishmen, there were
less pleasing traits. One frequently encounters
ill-will, jealousy and self-interest. [note: 17  Cath. Bulletin, loc. cit., p. 222.]
The Irish as a nation are much given to
fun, amusement and frequent entertainments.
They extend incomparable hospitality
to strangers, particularly if conscious
Ruins of the Dominican priory, Kilrnallock
that advantage or profit is to be
made out of them-otherwise indeed
their hospitality and kindness are not so
much in evidence where foreigners are
concerned. Indeed, should a stranger
happen to be at variance with one of
them, he may take for granted that all
will be against him, for the Irish are
thoroughly united in promoting the
interests of one of themselves, as against
people of another country. I myself have
known some merchants who came to
Ireland very rich, and were reduced to
utter poverty by losing their all in
commercial transactions with them.
It is equally true, however, that they
bear little goodwill towards each other;
and they are so filled with the spirit of
jealousy and rivalry that all the misfortunes
of the kingdom have been
caused by this accursed vice of theirs.
But as between countryman and
stranger, one could not believe how
ready they are to unite in defence of the
former' s interests. But I must not decry
those that do not deserve it; for many of
them are of quite the opposite nature, and
of this class I myself have met some who
were thoroughly honourable and honest
in all their dealings.
Massari did not pursue the uncongenial
subject. Everything melted and disappeared
in the contemplation of the mighty tasks
which lay ahead. With some emotion he
assured Thomas Rinuccini, senator of
Florence: "In short, we are in Ireland, we
are in Ireland, may God be ever praised."
Arms and men are the theme of the
Commentarius and hardly less so of Massari's
narrative. The harsh arbitrament of war
alone could find the answer to the politico-religious
problems of the age, in Ireland as
elsewhere. In the travail of 1645-49 an
ineluctable fact became evident at an early
stage: Irish national unity was not to be
realised. The first sentence of the Nuncio's
Report to the Holy See in 1649 unerringly
strikes a keynote-"The Catholics of Ireland
have from time immemorial been divided
into two adverse factions." The Nuncio
indicated the irreconcilable elements: the
Old Irish who were averse to heresy and
to the dominion of England; and the Old
English, a race introduced into Ireland in
the twelfth century. He also added the
New English or Modern Irish who came
over with the Protestant heresy. Thus any
creative or forward movement was impossible.
Rinuccini and Massari saw the
facade of unity so nobly proclaimed at
Kilkenny in 1642 crumble and dissolve.
In the words of the Nuncio: “The patronage
of the Holy See was rejected with contempt
and the rival factions were at daggers
drawn." When all was over he was
emphatic in his assertion that Ireland, "the
most remote region of Christianity" was an
example to countries nearer to Rome
"who, though nourished in the light of the
truth, might learn much from a country
where the sun was never seen."
On 22 February, 1649, the Nuncio
preached his farewell sermon to the people
of Galway in the Capuchin church. It was a
sermon that owed something of its inspiration
to Saint Paul's farewell discourse to the
Ephesians. That evening, to the weeping
and lamentation of the citizens of Galway,
Rinuccini and Massari embarked once again
on the San Pietro. Next morning, the
frigate sailed for France. In retrospect, the
Nuncio wrote of "the triumph of my
departure."
The verdict of the twentieth century on
Rinuccini's mission is crisp. It was doomed
to failure from the beginning because in
Ireland the commanding and binding
power of the national idea was non-existent.
To give that idea reality was
reserved for a later generation.
The last months in Ireland were spent in
Galway where the Nuncio had many
meetings with Father Richard O'Ferrall,
guardian of the Capuchin friary. Because
he had acted as interpreter at the general
assembly at Kilkenny, the friar was conversant
with all phases of the Confederation.
The meetings were significant; two years
later Rinuccini invited Father O'Ferrall to
come to Fermo to assist in writing the
history of the nunciature. As a result of the
death of the Nuncio in 1653 the work
devolved on Father O'Ferrall alone; later
he was joined by Father Robert O'Connell.
There is little reason to doubt that
Rinuccini's health was shattered by the
hardships he had endured in Ireland.
During the last two years of his life he was a
victim to recurring haemorrhages and
other disorders. The anxiety of his flock at
Fermo was intense. There was continuous
prayer by the people, with public fasts and
exposition of the Blessed Sacrament in the
churches. But Rinuccini knew that the end
was drawing near; with calm, he prepared
for his last journey. He died on 13
December, 1653.
At this point Father O'Connell, now sole
author of the Commentarius, barely restrains
his emotions. The dead prelate was
so adorned with wisdom, eloquence and
virtue that he had few peers. With vigorous
pen, Father O'Connell expresses his surging
feelings. Like the prophets of old, the
Nuncio was rejected! The indictment of the
unbelieving Jews by Stephen, the protomartyr,
is repeated and given an Irish
setting. The Ormondists and the heretics
were stiff-necked and obdurate; their evil
machinations and obduracy defeated yet
another prophet! How pungently does the
Commentarius take farewell of the Irish
Nuncio: "Which of the prophets have not
your fathers persecuted? " (Acts of the
Apostles, vii, 52).
There was also something of prophecy
in Father O'Connell's valediction- the
labours of the Nuncio are deserving of
timeless remembrance by the Irish people.
One can still read the inscription [note: 18 Com. Rin., v., pp. 166-67.] on
Rinuccini's tomb in the cathedral of Fermo:
Archbishop Rinuccini's tomb in the Cathedral at Fermo
showing the inscription in Latin
To the memory of John Baptist Rinuccini, a Florentine, prince- archbishop
Of Fermo,
Who so energetically discharged the office of pontifical legate to the
Catholic confederacy of Ireland.
As a shining example of pastoral care and apostolic spirit
He was pre-eminent.
With girded loins he carried in his hands the burning lamps of integrity
And wisdom and never laid them down.
Whose right hand whether closed or open wrought deeds of manly worth,
That same hand was always extended to the poor from a heart full of
Pity
Whom on his deathbed he named the heirs to everything he possessed,
When that hand held a pen many were those whom he enlightened.
His feet so splendid in the wondrous work of preaching peace
With restless zeal ever sought his flock, reaching even to the
Furthermost places ;
Thus did he become the exemplar for bishops everywhere,
Gifted with great talents he gained as many more.
He entered, as our hope is, into the joy of the lord
On 13 December, 1653
In his sixty-first year.
Bibliography: Commentarius Rinuccinianus; Massari, My Irish Campaign; Moran, Persecutions of Irish
Catholics as above; Aiazza, The Embassy of Monsignor G. B. Rinuccini, trans. Hutton, Dublin, l873; Meehan,
The Confederation of Kilkenny, Dublin, l882; Hynes, The Mission of Rinuccini, Dublin, 1932; Landsdowne,
Glanerought and the Petty-Fitzmaurices, Oxford Press, 1937; O 'Flanagan, The Blackwater in Munster, London,
1844; O.S. maps; Down Survey.
