Our people continued to cherish the Humanities even when they were
being subjected to the grossest inhumanities by a race which considered
itself culturally superior to them. Some fair-minded members of that
race, and others in search of damning evidence, have recorded their surprise at
the fluency in Latin acquired by the products of the Hedge Schools. The people
of Kerry, in particular, attained and retained a wonderful proficiency in Latin, a
tradition still happily alive among the scholars of the Kingdom.
Writing in 1797, George Holmes mentioned in his travel diary of Cork and
Kerry, that, "The peasantry of the County Kerry are very marked in their
character: tall, and well-proportioned, black hair, brown complexion, and with
very expressive eyes. Their mental faculties are very acute and lively; and among
the uncultivated parts of the country many are to be met with who are all good
Latin scholars, yet do not speak a word of English. Greek is also taught in the
mountainous parts by some itinerant teachers."
One of the aims of the English Educational
Policy in Ireland, which was in full
force a century ago, was the destruction of
our old Classical schools, which appear to
have descended in part from the ancient
monastic schools, and in part from the
much more ancient Bardic schools. One of
the educationalists of the National Board
was an Anglican clergyman, named The
Reverend W. Hickey, M.A., who was also
the author of text-books for the instruction
of Irish boys and girls. It was his very
considered opinion that Latin was bad for
the lower orders, and indeed he himself was
manifestly unburdened by classical education,
and had, as a consequence, little grace
in the writing of English. Having warned
all whom it might concern against schools
where Latin and Greek were taught because
they were a nuisance, and because there
were other subjects ten times more useful
for children, he went on to state in the
course of a letter to The Wexford Herald:
"I could never bear to hear of their
reading a sentence in the books they were
taught. This doctrine would not go down,
however, in the Kingdom of Kerry, where
rich and poor are, or were some time ago,
classical scholars. I recollect some years
back, riding through a valley in that
country, and seeing a ragged fellow on a
high rock, herding goats; I beckoned him
to come down, and asked him some
questions on the romantic spot on which I
stood. He did not understand one word I
said, but addressed me very fluently in
Latin. I was as badly off there. We parted as
wise as we met. It struck me that he must
have been taught the Latin in Irish, for not
one word of English could he speak, or
even understand. Not so another Latinist
whom I-fell in with on the same day, who
answered me in tolerable English (but with
a little more of the brogue than I was
accustomed to) all the questions I put to
him. This was a schoolmaster who had
emerged from his little schoolroom of sods,
at the edge of the turf-bog, and had
collected all his boys around him, under a
sunny bank by the roadside. I asked him
what he taught these fine boys? He
answered that he taught them Latin and
Greek, and that he hoped I would let him
put them through their construin and parsin
for me. I told him I was a bad judge of
these matters, and was hurrying on to
Dingle. He pressed hard.
"I am still of opinion that this kind of
education is not only useless, but injurious
to the lower classes. Such knowledge
creates pride."
That our wandering Irish poet-scholars
retained a remarkable proficiency in writing
Latin verse is evident from the poem
written by Denis Macnamara, or Donnchadh
Ruadh Mac Con Mara (1715-1810),
author of the beautiful Ban Chnoic Eireann
Oigh, on the death, of his fellow-poet
Tadhg Gaedhealach O Suilleabhain. The
poem begins :
Thaddeus hic situs est, oculos huc flecte
viator,
Illustrem vatem parvula terra tegit!
Heu! Jacet exanimis, fatum irrevocabile vicit
Spiritus e terra sidera summa petit!
and continues with many a lordly line
such as
Pacem optavit pace igitur versatur in alto.
Donnchadh Ruadh was one of the star
poets of the Sliabh gCua school, high in
the heart of the Comeraghs. And here and
there on tombstones we find such
tributes as this to Sean Clarach who drew
the poets of north Cork and Limerick
around him at Rath Luirc, where he is
buried under the stone that says
Johannes Mac Donald cogno
minatus Clarag vir vere
Catholicus et tribus linguis
ornatus, nempe Graeca Latina
et Hybernica non vulgaris
Ingenii poeta tumulatur
ad hunc cippum obiit aetatis
Anno 63. Salutis 1754.
Requiescat in pace.
But we are at the tenuous end of a long
tradition which began with the Bardic
Schools and lasted down to the Hedge
Schools. The origins of the Bardic Schools
is unknown, but it has been established that
they existed and were firmly established in
prehistoric times. They carried on their
education in the home-language, and later
in Latin for some subjects. Daniel Corkery
quotes Zimmer's theory that the flight of
Gaelic scholars to Ireland in the fifth
century, as a result of the barbarian invasions,
was responsible for introducing the
Latin language and Christianity to these
schools, and thus served to pave the way
for Saint Patrick. These lay-controlled
Bardic Schools continued to exist alongside
the later monastic schools, though we do
not know in what way, if any, they coordinated
studies. The Irish grew proficient
at Latin in both schools, so that Stanihurst
was able to record in the sixteenth century
that "The Irish speak Latin like a vulgar
language, learned in their common schools
of leechcraft and law.''
The Hedge Schools were the centres of
classical education among our people as
well as the impoverished yet powerful
bulwarks of their Faith. The ruthlessness
with which they were sought out by the
enemies of the Church and the Classics is
an indication of their persistent strength.
For, as we shall prove, the almost ferocious
hatred of the Ascendancy towards Latin was
based, not merely on its associations with
Catholicism, and the link which it gave the
Irish to bind them to the culture of Europe,
but because it made them useless. Hickey,
and countless others charged with the
education of the poor Irish from the time
of Cromwell and the Penal Laws, emphasised
the need for an educational system
which should make the Irish useful-useful,
that is, as slaves on the West Indian plantations
and later as factory fodder in England.
Sir James Caldwell, writing in 1764, stated:
"The Papists are not only connected by the
general tie of Religion with France and
Spain, but there is not a family in the
island which has not a relation in the
Church, in the Army, or in Trade with
those Countries; and in order to qualify
the children for foreign service they are all
taught Latin in schools kept in poor huts, in
many places in the southern part of this
Kingdom." The deportation of hedge
schoolmasters into servitude in the West
Indies and North American plantations
continued to operate till the end of the
eighteenth century. It is a tribute to those
schoolmasters that, next to the priest, they
were the objects of the greatest hostility
and hatred by the Planters. Several more
liberal-minded English travellers, such as
Arthur Young and George Holmes, testify
to the great zeal for learning displayed by
even the poorest sections of the Irish, so
that the Hedge Schools produced far better
scholars than the Charity and Charter
Schools. The cumulative evidence of these
fair and unbiased witnesses from 1760
through the following century is best
summed up in the Leader in the London
Times, written in the memorable year 1916.
"The history of Education in Ireland
from first to last shows an eagerness for
learning worthy of the days when Ireland
dominated the culture of Europe. . . .
The education in English charity schools,
in the English endowed schools, in practically
all schools became worse than ineffective,
while in Ireland, somehow or another,
the love and desire for learning among the
commonality survived. It did more than
survive. It was a living natural force at
the very time when, at the close of the
Napoleonic War, English national education
was the despair of every thinker. . . .
The hunger and thirst after learning had
survived in Ireland for a period of a
thousand years; and, to-day, if it is allowable
to prophesy, the future of Ireland will be
determined by the persistence of that
tradition." The persistence of that tradition
was made possible by the heroic labours
and wise visions of men like the great
Brother Rice, who was himself the product
of a hedge school.
The shameless audacity with which
English educational policy in Ireland was
directed towards making us a subject race
is best judged by contemporary witnesses.
For the children of this world seemed to
be very wise in their generation, which
was that of the dawning Industrial Revolution.
Cheap labour was as necessary for
British factories as slaves had been for the
tobacco plantations. Ireland was an obvious
source of supply. But the Faith and love of
higher learning among the Irish was
proving an obstacle. So far from being the
opium of the Irish people, the Creed and
the Classics were making them high-minded
and proud and unsuited to their
servile condition.
Writing to Thomas Creevy from Knocklofty
in 1828, the Earl of Donoughmore
stated: "In Ireland, education has done
great harm, for it is turned to no useful purpose.
With a greatly overcharged population,
and comparatively no occupation for it, it
produces nothing but speculation on their
own condition and the means of amending
it."
In the very year in which Brother Rice
set up his first school, Joseph Lancaster
wrote to the Honourable John Foster,
Chancellor of the Exchequer for Ireland,
submitting " a general plan which may
tend to make youth more useful and
intelligent without elevating them above the
situations in life for which they may be
designed . ... The first object is the training
of young teachers, on whose peaceful
dispositions dependence may be placed;
and in a country where such numbers of
young men, desirous of knowledge are to
be met with, it is possible, with the low
price of labour, to train and employ them
at a moderate expense .... The young men
selected should be of poor circumstances;
this would make them content with
smaller salaries .... In England, girls are
employed at some schools of industry, in
making shirts, jackets, and other articles
of dress for seamen. They receive only five
pence each for them, finding their own
needles and thread. They are employed by
proprietors of warehouses, to contract to
supply Government. It may be well for
those in power to consider how far the
poor of Ireland might be employed to
make shirts and jackets .... "
How the shirt-makers themselves felt
about this industry was best interpreted in
twelve bitterly ironic stanzas of Thomas
Hood's The Song of the Shirt:
Work- work- work I
My labour never flags;
And what are its wages? A bed of straw,
A crust of bread - and rags.
That shattered roof, this naked floor -
A table - a broken chair -
And a wall so blank, my shadow I thank
For sometimes falling there.
It is possible that the subject of Hood's
poem might have been any one of the
500,000 Irish workers who entered Britain
between 1841 and 1851 when the Famine
had come to complete the work, begun by
the educationalists, of throwing them on the
British labour market.
True, the English ruling classes regarded
the education of their own labouring
classes with suspicion and dread. A certain
Mr. Giddy delivered himself of this address
in the House of Commons in 1807:
"However specious in theory the
project might be, of giving education to
the labouring masses of the poor, it
would in effect be found to be prejudicial
to their morals and happiness; it would
teach them to despise their lot in life
instead of making them good servants in
agriculture and other laborious employments
to which their rank in society has destined
them, instead of teaching them subordination,
it would render them factious and
refractory, as was evident in the 
manufacturing counties; it would enable them
to read seditious pamphlets, vicious
books, and publications against Christianity;
it would render them insolent to
their superiors; and in a few years the
result would be that the legislature
would find it necessary to direct the
strong arm of power towards them, and
so to furnish the executive magistrate
with much more vigorous laws than
were now in force."
(Quoted in Hammon's Town Labourer).
The matter of educating "the labouring
masses of the poor" was debated in England
for more than half a century afterwards,
and it was not till thirteen Bills had been
thrown out of Parliament that the School
Boards for Elementary Education were set
up in 1870, with subsequent clauses added
providing that religious instruction should
be given of such nature as to keep the lower
classes in just humility and the acceptance of
a state in life suited to them, with promise of
heavenly reward hereafter. All of which was
excellent material for the Marxists. So
while the Christian Brothers in Ireland
were re-lighting the zeal for learning and
love of the Classics among the impoverished
people, the working classes in England were
being reared on an educational programme
which was specifically designed to be
“ useful”.
Meanwhile, in 1852, the question of what
is " useful" in education, involving the
merits of Latin in earning a livelihood, was
discussed in Dublin by one of the most
scholarly and saintly Englishmen of all
time, Cardinal Newman. He took Locke
and the Edinburgh Reviewers to task for
their strident insistence on utility in education
and instruction. “They insist,” he said,
" that education should be confined to some
particular and narrow end, and should
issue in some definite work, which can be
weighed and measured. They argue as if
everything, as well as every person, had its
price; and that where there is a great
outlay, they have a right to expect a return
in kind. This they call making education
and instruction 'useful', and 'Utility'
becomes their watchword .... "
"These views," the great scholar continued,
"are sanctioned by the authority of
no less a name than that of Locke. He
condemns the ordinary subjects in which
boys are instructed at school, on the ground
that they are not needed by them in after
life . . . and distinctly limits utility in
education to its bearing on the future
profession or trade of the pupil, that is, he
scorns the idea of any education of the
intellect, as such. 'Can there be any thing
more ridiculous,' he asks, 'than that a
father should waste his own money, and
his son's time, in setting him to learn the
Roman language, when, at the same time,
he designs him for a trade, where he, having
no use for Latin, fails not to forget that
little which he brought from school, and
which, 'tis ten to one he abhors for the
ill-usage it procured him? Could it be
believed, unless we have everywhere
amongst us examples of it, that a child
should be forced to learn the rudiments of
a language which he is never to use in the
course of life that he is designed to, and to
neglect all the while the writing a good
hand, and casting accounts, which are of
great advantage in all conditions of life,
and to most trades indispensably necessary?'
Nothing of course can be more absurd
than to neglect in education those matters
which are necessary for a boy's future
calling; but the tone of Locke's remarks
evidently implies more than this, and is
condemnatory of any teaching which tends
to the general cultivation of the mind, as
distinct from the professional."
Here, with his customary precision,
Newman laid bare the real intention behind
the protestations of the utilitarians who are
so often more interested in downing
culture and the Humanities than in raising
the standard of the useful. Like certain
Leftists in our time, they do protest too
much. The perpetual war against culture
camouflages itself in many ways and
centuries as a crusade in favour of the
underprivileged.
Newman went on to remind his listeners
that the question stated by Locke had been
debated in the first decade of the nineteenth
century by the Edinburgh Reviewers,
who made some uncautious and satirical
remarks about Oxford's choice of the
Classics as the basis of education. They
laid themselves widely and wantonly open
to the withering fire that extinguished the
careless Kingsley when they wrote: "The
present state of Classical education cultivates
the imagination a great deal too
much, and other habits of mind a great
deal too little, and trains up many young
men in a style of elegant imbecility, utterly
unworthy of the talents with which nature
has endowed them .... The matter of fact
is, that a Classical scholar of twenty-three
or twenty-four is a man principally conversant
with works of imagination. His
feelings are quick, his fancy lively, his
tastes good. Talents for speculation and
original enquiry he has none, nor has he
formed the invaluable habit of pushing
things up to their first principles, or of
collecting dry and unamusing facts as the
materials for reasoning. All the solid and
masculine parts of his understanding are
left wholly without cultivation; he hates
the pain of thinking, and suspects every man
whose boldness and originality call upon
him to defend his opinions and prove his
assertions.''
Newman had little trouble in deflating
those fallacies, most of which still fly about,
expressing themselves in less elegant phrases,
but with the same dour and Puritanical
intent. He closed in on their assumption,
repeated so often by the utilitarians, that
there is a necessary opposition between
culture and utility, by enunciating the
principle that intellectual culture is its own
end; for what has an end in itself, has its use
in itself also. This is allied to another
principle that though the useful is not always
good, the good is always useful. Developing
the Thomistic principle that it is of the
nature of goodness to diffuse itself, he
continued: "If the intellect is so excellent
a portion of us, and its cultivation so
excellent, it is not only beautiful, perfect,
admirable, and noble in itself, but in a
true and high sense it must be useful to
the possessor and to all around him; not
useful in any low, mechanical, mercantile
sense, but as diffusing good, or as a blessing,
or a gift, or power, or treasure, first to the
owner, then through him to the world.
I say then, if a liberal education be good, it
must necessarily be useful too."
In the course of the same address
Newman demonstrated that "a cultivated
intellect, because it is a good in itself,
adds a power and a grace to every exercise
and occupation which it undertakes." And
a Classical education enables a man to form
his judgements, to discriminate, sharpen
his mental vision, and endows his mind,
after the manner of physical health, with
vigour, energy, agility and the power to
endure fatigue." Now, by a curious turn
of events and one which would have
intrigued the good Cardinal himself, scientists
and businessmen have discovered this
very fact, that a Classical education fits men
for employment in alrn.ost any trade or
profession, even in the mechanical and
mercantile sense! Even Locke would be
amazed to find how useful Latin has been
found in trade and industry.
This was revealed at Cambridge in May,
1959, during the spirited debates on the
retention of Latin as a compulsory requirement
for entrance to the university. The
"usefulness" of Latin in the modern world
was demonstrated in negative and positive
ways. It was shown, for instance, that when
the United States of America rejected
Latin in secondary education as obsolete
junk, they did not raise the standard of
efficiency in education thereby. American
scholastic standards remain well below
those of Europe, and the American Latin-less schoolboy is on an average two years
behind ours. Scientists during the debate
were agreed that "Latin had unrivalled
advantages for teaching concise expression,"
and where there is concise expression there
must be a matching precision of thought.
Another point stressed in favour of
Latin was the mental discipline it imposes
and exacts. A boy or girl proficient at
Latin must be both clever and industrious.
Latin has to be learned, and there are no
possibilities of short cuts or of putting up a
show at examinations to conceal its absence.
So, an employer looking for a good
employee is advised to select one with a
good record in Latin, for he will be sure
of getting an intelligent and industrious
worker. What a cogent argument for the
utilitarians!
Greats at Oxford is the summum bonum
of Classical education. So the chairman of a
big oil company was once asked why he
recruited firsts in Greats. His reply would
delight the heart of any utilitarian"
Because they sell more oil!" To what base
uses may Horace come ! Doubtless the
Mantuan had no vision that he was training
oil magnates two thousand years to come,
but Newman has been proved right in his
contention that Latin improved mental
efficiency .
The ancient debate about the usefulness
of Latin has now taken the form of Science
versus the Humanities, on the renewed
assumption that there is some innate
opposition. Contestants say that science
makes men narrow-minded, insensitive
and de-Christianized, and it is a curious
fact that many Western scientists are men
of Leftist, and even Communist leanings.
The Humanities, as is well known, broaden
the mind and make men more human and
sympathetic. Then the Russian satellites
sent some impressionable people into a
panic of indignation against Western backwardness
in the technical field, and the
Humanities came in for more sharp
criticisms. Some universities, such as
North Staffordshire and Churchill College,
Cambridge, are compromising, humanizing
the scientists with one initial year devoted
to the Humanities.
One of the most cogent arguments of all
in favour of retaining Latin in the modern
and future ages comes from the scientists
themselves. There is a growing need for an
international language which will be relatively
easy to learn and, while being rich in
vocabulary, will be infinitely flexible to
the expression of new ideas. The choice
of Latin is obvious. If it satisfied the
scholastics it ought be flexible enough for
the scientists in conveying data and ideas
more perceptible and less subtle than those
contained in the Summae and Sentences of
the Middle Ages.
And here the Apostolic Letter, Veterum
Sapientia, of February, 1962, as well as the
Ecumenical Council, throw the balance in
favour of retaining Latin so powerfully as
to convince Classicists and utilitarians alike.
"Latin by its nature," said Pope John, "is
perfectly adapted for promoting every
form of culture among every people. It
does not give rise to jealousies, is impartial
to all, is not the privilege of anyone and is
well accepted by all." And again: " Latin has
a noble and characteristic conformation, a
concise, varied and harmonious sty le, full
of majesty and dignity, which contributes
singularly to clarity and solemnity." Some
time ago, Doctor Goodwin Beach of
Trinity College, Connecticut, writing in
The International Language Review, presented
the idea of selecting Latin as the
best international language. He said that if
the old Renaissance and mediaeval methods
of teaching it as a spoken tongue were
revived, the practicalities of Latin would
soon become evident. Latin is a language
not too difficult to master and has a
universal appeal. An added argument in
favour of using Latin as the universal
language of science is the fact that most
scientific terms are already mined from
Latin and Greek. "Television" is an
obvious and recent example.
While the Pope's admonitions were
primarily addressed to the clerics of the
Catholic Church,-and they were couched
in an authoritative tone unusual with
Pope John-he considered the immense
benefits which the diffusion of Latin might
convey to mankind at large: "The language
of Rome, used in the Latin rite of the
Church, can still render noble service
today in the work of peace and unity. It
can also render service to the new nations
which are confidently entering international
life. It is, in fact, not linked with the interests
of any nation." And in order that it may
keep abreast of modern ideas and modes of
thought, His Holiness advocated the setting
up of a new Academic Institute of the
Latin Language. So, far from being a dead
language, Latin can become the international
language of the future, with the
supreme utility of being a perfect means of
communication between scientists, who
have in so many ways replaced priests as
the voices of authority in this secularized
society.
Nipping winds of anti-Latin agitation
are nagging some academic and educational
circles here, and some "progressives"
have gone as far as suggesting that it
should be dropped as a compulsory subject
for entering University College, Dublin.
Its place in secondary schools, some hold,
shout: be taken by one or two modern
languages. Catholic schools in Canada did
not abandon Latin when the British
Canadian schools did. When the West
Canadian schools dropped the Latin requirement
long before the last war, there was a
drastic fall in the number of children
taking it at secondary schools. Outside
Catholic schools the Classics have almost
vanished from British Canada, though they
are vigorously alive in schools and universities
of French Canada. And now there
are many in the New World weeping the
loss of the common bond which their
children, when they grow to be adults,
will miss with the rest of Christian civilization,
which is now re-grouping its cultural
forces and integrating itself after the
inspiration of the Catholic Church on the
religious plane.
In view of the loyalty of our people to
Latin in the past, it would be the height of
folly to let it languish and die in our
midst now. But it would be easier to keep
it alive and renew its vitality as a second
vernacular here if it were presented in less
formidable ways in our schools. Why are
our children compelled to scale the Capitol
on its darkest, steepest side with Caesar
and Horace? Why are they forced to learn
long and tedious vocabularies of military
terms from Caesar's war dispatches? The
manner in which Latin is taught creates
a prejudice of petrified dullness in most
young minds, so that, ever after, they
associate Latin with passionless and pedantic
ways of life, without religion, without
enthusiasm. and without love.
Why should we not initiate our children
into the splendours of Latin by way of
the Vulgate? Might we not use the Missal
as a holy and familiar starting-point, and
from that pass to the glories of Medieval
Latin, with its vast wealth of prose and
poetry of magnificence in range and
depth? A strong plea for this approach has
been made by Frederick Brittain, the
editor of The Penguin Book of Latin Verse,
which gives as many pages to Saint Thomas
Aquinas as to Horace, and devotes less than
one-sixth of its space to Classical Latin.
Latin should come easily and pleasantly
to Irish Catholic children, for it is not a
matter of learning a completely alien
tongue, but of developing an innate
attraction and familiarity in which the past
of their religion and race is deeply involved,
and which may yet become the second
vernacular of an integrated Europe. Maxima
debetur puero reverentia, and we can do
youth no greater reverence than teach it
the language of reverence.
