This is the story of Ballintubber Abbey-the story of the abbey that refused to die:
partially burned in 1265, rebuilt in 1270, stripped of all its lands and possessions by
Henry VIII, still continuing to sing the praises of God within its hallowed walls. A
hundred years later in 1653 the Cromwellians tried to destroy and demolish it. But, though
the monastic buildings were destroyed, the church again escaped total destruction. 1846
marked the era of resurgence though indeed for four decades the work of restoration was
interrupted by the famine of l847. The abbey was never abandoned, and in l889 the
work of restoration was resumed. What a proud record it all is! Burned twice, suppressed,
proscribed and still never utterly destroyed. Surely it deserves the proud title of "the
abbey that refused to die."
About seven miles south of Castlebar, the county town of Mayo, and one mile off
the main Castlebar-Ballinrobe road, stands the abbey of Saint Patrick, Ballintubber.
Among the medieval religious foundations whose ruins dot the Irish countryside,
the abbey is unique. It is the only church in Ireland still in daily use that was founded by
an Irish king ; it is the only church in Ireland in which the Mass has been offered almost
without a break for 750 years.
The annals record its foundation in the year 1216. [note: Annals of Loch Cé.] The fourth Lateran Council had
just closed; Innocent III was in the chair of Peter. The fifth Crusade had been victorious
at Damietta while in Europe the new religious orders, the Dominicans and the Franciscans,
were just being founded. In England King John had made his peace with his unruly barons
in the signing of Magna Carta at Runnymede. Westminster Abbey was yet to be founded
in 1245, while three centuries later, when Columbus discovered America, the abbey of
Ballintubber was already venerable with age.
In Irish Ballintubber - Baile Tobair
Phadraig-means the townland or homestead
of the well of Patrick. Here, beside
the site of the present abbey, Saint Patrick
founded one of his churches in Mayo, on
his return from his long vigil of forty days
and nights on the holy mountain of
Croagh Patrick. Hence we may say that
not merely for 750 years, but for l,500
years, a Christian church has occupied the
site of the abbey of Ballintubber.
"But it was the time,
'Twas in the reign
Of Cathal Mór of the wine-red hand".
Ballintubber Abbey was founded by
King Cathal Crovdearg O'Conor-Cathal
Mór of the wine-red hand. He was of the
royal race of the O'Conors, kings of
Connacht and notable patrons of the arts.
The Cross of Cong, one of our national
treasures, was designed for his father,
Turloch O'Conor, and the carving of the
Ardagh chalice was designed by Turloch' s
sister, Finola. Cathal had been inaugurated
as king at Carnfraich, near Tulsk, Co.
Roscommon, and had made a grant of five
marks per annum for ever to the church of
Citeaux in France, the birthplace of the
Cistercian order. [note: Curtis: History of Medieval Ireland.] After his death the Annals
of Connacht refer to him as "The king who
best established peace and tranquillity of all
the kings of Ireland; the king who built the
most monasteries and houses for religious
communities; the king who of all the kings
of Ireland God made most perfect in every
good quality". Cathal built and endowed
the Benedictine convent of Kilcreevanty,
near Tuam, and the Cistercian abbey of
Knockmoy, Co. Galway, where he died
in the habit of a Cistercian monk in the
year 1224.
Though there are many references in the
ancient annals to 1216 as the year of its
foundation, the circumstances are shrouded
in legend. Cathal was the natural son of
King Turloch. Before he ascended the
throne of his fathers he was in flight from
the vengeance of Turloch's queen. According
to one legend, the monasteries were the
only place where he and his mother could get
Saint Patrick's Abbey, showing the boggy land in the left foreground, where the lake was in 1216.
The gnarled tree in the graveyard, on the left, is the tree on which Sean na Sagart was hanged
sanctuary during their exile. Local folklore
tells us that during this period he had been
working in Ballintubber for a man named
Sheridan who treated him with the greatest
kindness. Leaving Ballintubber, Cathal
vowed that he would never forget the
kindness shown him there. Years afterwards,
when Cathal had ascended the
throne, he paid a visit to his old friend. The
king asked him if there was any favour he
could do in return for the kindness shown
him in the days of exile. Sheridan told him
that he was now old and that he wanted for
little in this world; if the king would restore
their old church which was collapsing he
would be eternally grateful. Cathal
promised that instead of repairing the old
church he would build a new one.
The years went by, and on his next visit
the king asked the old man how he liked his
new church. Sheridan reproached Cathal
for not keeping his royal word. But the
king asserted that he had given orders for
such a church to be built. On investigation
it was found that a church had indeed been
built, but in Baile to bair Bhrighde, Roscommon,
instead of Baile tobair Phadraig,
Mayo. And the story goes that the king
vowed to build another church seven
times more magnificent in Ballintubber,
Mayo. The church in Ballintubber, Roscommon,
is now a ruin, but the abbey at
Ballintubber, Mayo, is still proudly erect,
and still in daily use almost 800 years afterwards.
The old church beside which the abbey of
Ballintubber was built was a Patrician
church. Close by is the well where Patrick
baptised his first converts in the district.
From Ballintubber, too, there runs a road
all the way to Croagh Patrick. This road,
well-known in Irish history, was called
Tóchar Phadraig, and it may still be traced.
In his History of Mayo, Knox refers to this
road as the best known and best preserved
road of the medieval period. Along it the
pilgrims thronged to Croagh Patrick. On
their way the pilgrims stayed overnight at
churches on the route. Some of these, such
as the ancient churches of Drum and
Loonamore in the barony of Carra, had
large "cashels" or enclosures of rectangular
plan, which seem to indicate that they
were intended for the pilgrim wayfarer.
The primitive bridge of the time, planks of
wood laid on stone piers, was called clar or
clareen. The village near Ballintubber,
where the Tóchar Phadraig can still be
clearly seen, is called Clareen. Here, too,
the Tóchar had to cross a small stream, and
the road can be traced on either bank. Petrie
has a note that in the year 1224 Donncadh,
chief of Clann Tomaltaigh, died at Tobar
Patraic on his pilgrimage. From this we may
conclude that the newly-founded abbey was
a station on the pilgrim's way, a natural
inference when we recall that it occupied a
Patrician site.
Tobar Pátraic, as the abbey is called in
the Annals of the Four Masters was founded
for Canons Regular, and dedicated to
the Holy Trinity. In Papal documents, it
appears as Monasterium Sanctae Trinitatis de
villa fontis Patricii- the monastery of the
Holy Trinity of the town of Patrick's well.
Strictly speaking, the canons were not
monks, but secular priests living in community
following the rule attributed to
Saint Augustine. Their primary work was
the care of souls. They had been introduced
into Ireland by Saint Malachy as part
of the twelfth-century reform of the Irish
Church. Their first appearance in the west
was in the priory of Saint John in Tuam
about 1150. [note: Egan, P.K., The Parish of Ballinasloe.] The date of their appearance at
Ballintubber in 1216 and the death of their
first abbot there is recorded in the Annals
of Loch Ce: "Anno 1225 Maelbhrighde
O'Maicin, abbot of Tober Patraic, went to
rest in the Lord . . . it was by him the
church of Tober Patraic was begun and its
sanctuary and crosses diligently finished in
honour of Patrick and Mary and the
Apostle Saint John" . According to tradition
only men of noble birth were
admitted, a fact which may account for the
immense estates which in later years the
abbey possessed.
With the passage of the years the abbey
flourished. It had a dependency or cell, the
priory of Cross or Holy Cross, in the parish
of Kilmore-Erris in north Mayo. This
priory paid an annual rent to the abbey of
Tobar Patraic for the help given in the
building of the priory while the abbot of
Ballintubber had the right of appointing
the prior there. Holy Cross was founded on
the site of an earlier monastery dedicated
to Saint Brendan. A red sandstone inserted
in the south transept wall of Ballintubber
Abbey bears the inscription Gillabr. Petrie
has an engraving of the stone in his book,
Christian Inscriptions in the Irish Language,
which shows that the original inscription on
this stone was Gillabrenin-the servant of
Brendan.
Like so many abbeys in the thirteenth
century, Ballintubber Abbey was built on
the edge of a lake. To-day, as we look at
the church in the hollow, we find it
difficult to understand why such a site
should have been chosen. Then we remember that in the thirteenth century
much of the country was very densely
wooded. The very name of Mayo, in the
Irish, means the plain of the yew trees.
The poetic and musical names of so many
of the villages in the parish remind us of
the days when the hills and plains were
thickly forested. There still is the muntain
village in the parish named Derreendafderg
which means "the little oak-grove of the
red ox". If we except the Tóchar Padraig
there were few roads as we know them,
only bridle paths. Water was one of the
chief ways of transport, so, like many an
Irish monastery, Ballintubber Abbey was
built on the edge of Loch Carra. Such a site
ensured a plentiful water supply and good
fishing grounds. To-day, as we look from
the abbey, we can see a narrow strip of
water. In the early years of its foundation,
the waters of the lake lapped round its
walls, but as century succeeded century,
these waters receded as men drained their
lands. Some twenty years ago, the hulk of
one of the primitive boats in use was
unearthed in the lands surrounding the
abbey. It was across this mighty lake of
Carra that the hammers of the stone
masons resounded as they bent to their
task of raising this royal abbey.
There are several references in the annals
of Irish history to the abbey of Tobar
Patraic. The Annals of the Four Masters
tell of the burning of part of the abbey in
1265. It would seem that this burning was
confined to the nave. This part of the
church was rebuilt in 1270, and even to-day
differences in the style of building may be
noticed. The Annals of Loch Ce tell of the
burial there of Devorgail, daughter of
O'Flynn of Es (now Assylen, near Boyle,
in the County Roscommon) in the year
1296. In the Genealogy of Mac Firbis,
beside a reference to the date of the foundation
of the abbey in 1216, there is the
following entry : "Giolla an Ghioll Mac
Neill was the last king who possessed Ceara.
He was contemporary with Taithleach
Mór (son of Aodh Ó Dubhda) who took
possession of the county extending from
the River Rodhba to the Cadhnach, and
was interred at Baile tobair Phadraig. (And
the person who was bishop in the time of
these kings was Mael Isa Mag Mailin). ''
In the course of years, the abbey obtained
immense estates in Connacht through the
benefactions of kings and chieftains. There
are still extant two MSS. which tell of its
possessions. The first of these MSS. now in
the British Museum is dated 1416. This
document tells how the abbot of Ballintubber,
whose name is given as Thomas
Ó Rónáin, came before a public notary,
Donatus Ó Riogáin, bearing in his hand an
old rescript which listed all the grants,
bequests and privileges of the monastery.
The notary remarked that though the
document was getting the worse for age, it
was still quite legible. A new copy of the
rescript was made by the notary in which
mention is made of the foundation date of
the abbey, the name of its founder, and the
name of its first abbot. Next comes record
of the priory founded in Kilmore-Erris,
the rent to be paid, and finally a list of the
benefactors of the abbey for whom prayers
Above: Earliest
photograph of the abbey,
dated 1858
At Right:
Interior of roofless abbey,
before restoration work in
l870. Inner roof over the
chancel was not destroyed,
nor the original altar of 1216
which is seen in picture.
were to be offered in perpetuity. The names
of the benefactors are given as Barlaigh,
Brennaith, Joyces, Clan Ricard, Merrick,
Clan David, Bardaigh. Finally at the request
of the abbot, Laurence O'Maykin, the
parishes de Fonte (Ballintubber), Drummonechain,
and Tobarta were united to the
abbey. The archbishop, John, gave the
episcopal fourth of the revenues of these
places to the monastery and this grant his
successor later confirmed.
Though this MS. is dated 1416 it is most
probable that the date is a mistake for some
date between 1450 and 1462. The two
archbishops mentioned in the MS. were
John de Burg, who was archbishop from
1441 to 1450, and Donatus O'Murray, who
succeeded him and died in 1485. There is
still another reason which helps to fix the
date of the MS. In 1462, Pope Pius II
addressed a letter to Rory O'Conrith and
Odo Ornith, canons of the church of Tuam.
This letter directs them to make investigation
into a complaint made by John de
Stanton against Abbot Thomas O'Ronain
of Tobar Patraic of waste and malversation
in the property and revenues of the abbey.
It seems probable that the abbot mentioned
in the Papal letter is the same Thomas
O'Ronain who had the copy of the
rescript made by the public notary, Donatus
O'Riogain. The date of the document is
important, as it shows how jealously the
abbey guarded the privileges and immunities
granted to it over two centuries. [note: Blake, M. J.: Journal Galway Archaeological and Historical Society, vol. III, 1903-4.] 
In the Calendars of Papal Registers there
are many references to the abbey of Tobar
Patraic. In the year 1400 Pope Boniface IX
writes: "To the Augustinian abbot and
convent of Saint Patrick, Ballintober (de
villa fontis), in the diocese of Mayo.
Confirmation of all the liberties and
immunities from secular exactions granted
by kings, princes and others: and of their
possessions and benefices present and future
namely at present the rectory of Keara, the
vicarage of Dryim, the cell of Saint Mary
Cross, the priory of Crosrathig, the lands of
Cluainair and Gortratha, the mill of the
above cell, and the lands of Kiltene (or
Kilterie) in the diocese of Mayo and
Killala".
Another Papal letter in the same year
tells of the appointment, as abbot of
Ballintubber, of a priest of the diocese of
Cloyne in Co. Cork. "To Henry Maccolyn,
Provision to him, Canon of the Augustinian
priory of Saint Thomas Martyr by Botom
in the diocese of Cloyne, in priest's order
of the Augustinian monastery of Saint
Patrick, Ballintober (villa fontis), in the
diocese of Mayo, void by the death of
abbot Florence, during whose lifetime it
was reserved to the Pope." The priory of
Saint Thom.as Martyr can be identified as
the priory of Ballybeg, near Buttevant, Co.
Cork.
The connection between Mayo and
Cork, even in the thirteenth century, is very
interesting. About the middle of the
twelfth century, the O'Conors of Connacht
were striving for the kingship of Ireland.
This ambition of the O'Conors did not
appeal to the McCarthys of Munster, and
about 1140 Cormac McCarthy advanced
with his army into Connacht. On the intervention
of Muireadach O'Duffy, bishop of
Tuam, a peace was made whereby Cormac
undertook to build an Augustinian priory
at Cork to be a dependency of the abbey of
Cong and to be staffed with Connachtmen.
Cormac gave forever to Cong "a piece of
the land of Birra (Beara) and a bell-rope
when ships touch at the port of Dimboith
(Dunboy) ... and on the day on which he
is appointed and made the abbot of Cork, is
bound to render to the abbot of Conga
sixteen ... or half marks of gold for gilding
the chalices of the monastery of Conga.
And he bound to render to the treasury of
Conga all the vestments of the new abbot
of Cork that day. But the above-mentioned
Cormac McCarthy gave to the monastery
of Conga a bell-rope from every ship
touching at the port of Cork" -Rental of
Cong.
Two pictures of the people attending
Mass in the roofless abbey about
1865
At Right: The priest teaches
cathechism to the children, while
the adults continue to pray after
Mass
Below: The people listen to the
sermon at mass
An entry in Monasticon Hibernicum states:
"The son of the founder (Cormac king of
Munster) tells us that his father built this
abbey for the strangers from Connacht who
were the countrymen of Saint Barr." This
was the monastery of Saint Finbar's Cave,
a little to the west of where Saint Finbar's
Church stood. It was later known as
Gill Abbey from a noted abbot, Gilla
Aodha O'Mugin, who assisted at the synod
of Kells in 1152.
When the Anglo-Normans came to
Ireland in 1172, Cormac McCarthy, who
owed allegiance to Roderic O'Conor, supported
the invaders as did the O'Briens of
Limerick. With the invaders came the
Welshmen- the de Barrys, Barretts, the
Cogans. Having come to terms with the
McCarthys, they came to Connacht to
support the de Burgos in their struggle with
the O'Conors. Hence they were called the
Welshmen of Tirawley. They stayed on in
Tirawley, and the de Barrys founded a cell
at Crossmolina, Co. Mayo, which became
a dependency of Ballybeg just as Gill
Abbey was a dependency of Cong. Thus the
appointment of a canon of the priory of
Saint Thomas Martyr, Ballybeg, to the
abbey of Ballintubber, Co. Mayo, can be
explained. This might also explain why the
abbey of Tobar Patraic founded a cell so
far away in north Mayo as the cell of Saint
Mary Cross.
A letter from Pope Martin V in 1421
appointed the abbots of Saint Mary's, Cong,
Saint Michael's, Mayo, and Ballintober
(villa Fontis S. Patricii), to inquire into
the matter of the deanery of Tuam, a
major dignity held by William Rany
without canonical title.
In 1429 a letter from the same Pope is
addressed to the abbot of Ballintober
(de Fonte S. Patricii), in the diocese of
Tuam. Mandate archbishop John being
absent to absolve and dispense certain
parties.
In 1536 legislation was passed in Dublin
dissolving the monasteries, but outside the
Pale, especially in the west of Ireland, such
legislation was very difficult to enforce. The
last abbot of Tobar Patraic, Walter Mac
Evilly, submitted to Henry VIII in 1542,
but this surrender seems to have been merely
nominal. Even in the reign of Elizabeth I,
State papers tell the story of how religious
houses still continued to flourish despite
all such laws. The Calendar of Carew
MSS. tells that in l574 " the following are
possessed either by friars or rebels so as her
majesty hath no commodity by the same".
Here follows a list of twenty-one abbeys and
religious houses in Mayo, among which
number Ballintubber is mentioned. In the
Composition for the County Mayo, dated
1585, it is recorded: "In the barony of
Burishoole were four quarters of land
belonging to the Queen in right of the
Abbey of Ballyntobber: and in the barony
of Burreskara the eight quarters of Ballintubber
belonged to the Queen in right of
the Abbey of Ballyntobber." An Inquisition
taken at the "town of Clonecashel" (near
Ballinrobe) "before Richard Boyle, gentleman
. . . and lawful men of the Co.
Mayo" gives a list of the lands and possessions
of the monastery. A letter from
James I to Sir George Carey, deputy, in
1603 directs that "he shall make to John
King and John Bingley, tenants for divers
years yet to come of the abbeys of Boyle,
Cong and Ballintubber . . . a lease in
reversion of same for term of 50 years" .
For the year 1608 a letter from James I
makes "note of such Englishmen as are
now dwelling upon the lands of the abbey
of Boyle besides ten warders allowed by
His Majesty". Here follows the names of
thirty-seven Englishmen. Next comes the
list of Englishmen dwelling at Cong
numbering eight, while at Ballintubber are
listed "Nicholas King, John King, Hugh
Ralagh, Thomas Hussye". Later, a merchant
of the town of Galway, Robert
Blake, acquired an interest in the lands of
Ballintubber Abbey. By his will of 1612
he directs that the sum of forty shillings
Above: Ruins of the Chapter
House of the Abbey
At Left: Detail of the beautifully
wrought doorway
be paid out of the Abbey of Ballintubber to
poor scholars. In the Royal Visitation of
King James of 1615, mention is made of
the parishes of Ballyhean, Burriscarra,
Drimoneaghan annexed to the monastery
of Ballintubber. These parishes had been
farmed out to a Galway merchant, Robert
Blake, while the official Protestant vicars
were absentees on the plea of study at
Tuam college.
A summary of an Inquisition dated 1614
is preserved in Harris's Collectanea de rebus
Hibernicis. This is the most detailed statement
of the possessions of Tobar Patraic
and gives us an idea of the immense
territories of which it was possessed and of
the power and influence it must have
exercised. It mentions the lands, fisheries,
mills and watercourses which the abbey
owned in several baronies in Mayo, and
notes that the abbot had the right to cut and
carry away trees and timber from the woods
of Kiltarseyghtane for the building and
re-building of the monastery. It had more
than twenty-five quarters of land and if we
calculate one hundred and twenty acres for
each quarter we have some idea of the
immense estates of which the abbey was
possessed. The abbey lands were scattered
over twenty-five townlands in the modern
parishes of Burriscarra and Ballintubber,
Robeen, Kilmeena, where it owned the
island of Clynish, Drum, and Killawalla.
Even in the distant barony of Erris, it
owned lands where it had the cell of Saint
Mary Cross. The Strafford Survey of Mayo
for 1636 mentions Sir Richard Blake as
"possessor of the abbey of Ballintobber
with the appurtenances thereof". The
Blake family retained their portion of the
abbey estates for many years. In 1795
George Moore, of Moore Hall, purchased
the lands, and this family remained in
possession of the estates until, in 1911,
they were acquired by the Congested
Districts Board.
The present sacristy of the abbey was
originally the mortuary chapel of the de
Burgos of Mayo, a branch of one of the
most powerful Norman families. When
William, the brown Earl of Ulster, was
murdered in 1333 his lands, by feudal law,
became the property of his only daughter,
Elizabeth. Elizabeth de Burgo later married
Lionel, Duke of Clarence, bringing with her
the feudal titles to the lands in Connacht and
Ulster. Her collateral relatives, Ulick and
Edmund Albanach de Burgo, the sons of
William Liath, circumvented her claim to
Connacht by adopting Irish law which did
not recognize descent in the female line.
Their descendants thus became ''the king's
rebels in Connacht", until their submission
to Henry VIII in the sixteenth
century. Ulick was ancestor of Mac William
Uachtar (The Upper Mac William) or the
Clanrickard Burkes, while from Edmund
Albanach descended Mac William Iochtar
(The Lower Mac William) or the Burkes of
Mayo.
The first de Burgo interred in the abbey
was Sir Theobald, called in Irish Tiobóid na
Long because of his many ships. Theobald
was the son of Grania Uaile-Grace
O'Malley, the famous sea-queen of the
west. After the defeat of the Armada,
Tiobóid supported Mountjoy when the
Spaniards landed at Kinsale and received a
knighthood for his services, and later, in
1627, Charles I created him first Viscount
Mayo. Two years afterwards Tiobóid was
murdered outside the abbey by his brother-
in-law, Diarmeen O'Conor of Sligo, and
was interred in the abbey. The inscription
over his tomb may still be read-Tiobóid na
Long, 1st Viscount Lord Mayo. As an
example of seventeenth - century stone
carving, the tomb is worthy of note. The
base of the tomb with rudely carved
figures of the twelve apostles resembles an
altar and is surmounted by a massive stone
canopy. The last Viscount Mayo interred
there was another Theobald, the seventh
Viscount Mayo, who died in 1741. In the
destruction wrought by Cromwellian soldiers
in 1653 part of the stone carving of
Above: Work of restoration in 1889 shows
completed roof on part of the building
At Right: Piscina and sedilia of ancient
abbey, still in use
Below: Piscina of side chapel in form of
human head
the base of the tomb was destroyed, but it is
still possible to see the figures 'of seven of
the apostles with their appropriate emblems,
including Saint Peter with the keys, and
Saint Andrew with the cross.
The second Viscount Mayo, Myles Burke,
was, until his death in 1649, a member of
the Confederation of Kilkenny and at one
time a member of the supreme council of
that body. He was succeeded by his son,
Theobald, third Viscount Mayo. His name
appears on the list of Irish martyrs whose
cause was submitted to Rome in 1918 (cf
Irish Ecclesiastical Record 1918). The case for
the inclusion of the third Viscount Mayo,
reputed to have been martyred in 1651 is
made in the documents published by the
Congregation of Rites. The authorities
referred to in these official documents are:
Morison, F.M., Threnodia Hiberno-Catholica,
etc., (Oeniponti, 1659) and Descriptio
Regni Hiberniae, etc. (Romae, 1721).
In 1635 the Augustinian friars petitioned
Rome for permission to take over a number
of houses of the Canons Regular, including
Ballintubber.[note: Archives, Propaganda Fide, Rome.] There is no doubt that at
this time the friars did occupy some of the
abbeys of the Canons Regular such as
Derry, Killagh, Co. Kerry, and Lorrha,
Co. Tipperary, so the assumption is that
they also occupied Ballintubber. In 1643 the
friars sought a grant of all the houses of the
canons. This request seems to have been
successful as the existence of such a right
is presumed in documents of the provincial
of the Order in the years after 1643.
Ballintubber Abbey appears in the list of
Augustinian friaries which Lubin obtained
from James O'Mahony who was provincial
between 1640 and 1650.
The burning of the abbey in 1653 by
Cromwellian soldiers marks the second
attempt at the destruction of Tobar Patraic.
The Cromwellian destruction was only
partially successful. The monastic buildings,
the dormitories, the cloisters and domestic
quarters seem to have been completely
destroyed. The abbey church again escaped
total destruction. All of the timber roof
was consumed in the fire, but the internal
stone-vaulted roofs of the chancel, the side-chapels
and the old sacristy remained intact.
Even the altar seems to have escaped the
flames as the altar still in use to-day has been
identified as a thirteenth-century altar and
most probably is the original altar of 1216.
The Cromwellian despoliation did not
put an end to divine worship in the abbey;
Mass continued to be said there. The first
mention of the abbey in official documents
after the 1653 destruction occurs in an
ad limina report made by the archbishop of
Tuam in 1658. In this report, issued at
Nantes, where the archbishop was in exile,
the following reference is made to the
abbey. "There are five monasteries of
Regulars in the diocese, famous in times
past and very wealthy. Pride of place goes
to the abbey of Cong of Canons Regular
of Saint Augustine. Next comes that of the
well of Saint Patrick popularly known as
Ballintubber of the same Order". [note: Archivium Hibernicum, vol. v.]
In 1704 a law decreed that every popish
priest then in the country should appear in
court and there register his name, age and
parish. Registered priests were thus given a
legal status and were free to say Mass and
to carry out their pastoral duties. As all
the bishops of this period were exiled by
law, the British government hoped that
this generation of priests would soon die
out, and, with no bishops to ordain priests,
the people would soon be left without
clergy. This List of Popish Priests gives the
name of the priest living in Castleburke, the
village beside the abbey, as James Welsh,
his age as 37, and the date of his ordination
as l690. The official name of the parish in
which the abbey is situated is Burriscarra
and Ballintubber. At this period the parishes
were not yet united, and the name of the
pastor of Burriscarra and Drum which were
once administered by the abbey, is given as
Eneas McDonnell who was ordained in
1688. The priest in the village beside the
abbey, Castleburke, is again mentioned in a
At Left: The chancel as it is now,
with original altar.
Below: Exterior of windows of
chancel, showing delicacy and variety
in the stonework, date from 1216
letter from Lord Mayo whose castle was
in the same village. In 1711 Lord Mayo
writes: "According to your last resolution I
have yesterday apprehended the priest of
this parish and sent him to Castlebarre."
In the Presentment of the Grand Jury of Mayo
for 1715 there is a list of the registered
priests for the county. This document states
that Eneas McDonnell, of Burcas Cara
parish, is dead and that the priest in his
place is John Mally. State papers also record
a diocesan synod convened for the "chapel
of Borescara" for the 6 June, 1695-Saint
Jarlath's Day. This would indicate a church
of considerable size and it may have been held
in the abbey as there is no oral tradition of
any other chapel in the parish at this time.
Further documentary evidence of the
abbey being in use comes from the Report on
the State of Papery in Ireland of 1731. In this
report the Protestant archbishop of Tuam
writes that " there are Mass houses in most
parishes in some more than one, not certain
of the exact number which may amount to
70 or 80". In a similar report over the name
of Stratford Eyre in 1731 reference is made
to the number of friaries in the diocese of
Tuam. Herein mention is made of a friary
"in the parish of Ballentubber whose
number (of friars) is not known". [note: Archivium Hibernicum, vol. III.]
In 1846, in an appeal addressed to the
clergy of Ireland, John MacHale, archbishop
of Tuam, makes the following
reference to the strong tradition of continuity
of worship in the abbey: "In the
most gloomy days of religious intolerance
the holy sacrifice was never discontinued on
the old altar which still stands. While
bigotry and oppression crushed the energies
of the people and deluged the land with the
blood of their victims, the inhabitants of
Ballintubber from generation to generation
still lingered round the ruins of the abbey
and always found under the majestic arches
of the chancel a retreat from the rage of
persecution. The historical associations connected
with the abbey have been faithfully
handed down from father to son. ... " [note: Irish Catholic Directory, 1846-7.]
The strongest tradition of the district is
that the Mass has been said in the abbey
without a break since the year of its
foundation in 1216. There are still many
people of over eighty years in the area who
remember vividly attending Mass in the
unroofed abbey church. They recall the
memories of their parents and their grandparents.
One extraordinary example is that
of Mrs. Nora Prendergast, a woman of
ninety-nine years, who still assists at Mass
there every Sunday. How often she has
told the story of how she attended Mass in
the unroofed abbey kneeling on a flagstone!
Her father lived to be ninety-five years, and,
though for the early part of his life he lived
about six miles from the abbey, he was
well acquainted with all the traditions of the
place. Thus in the history of the abbey there
is still living a witness of the 1860' s and a
living memory of the 1760' s.
The people of the district used the abbey
not only as their church but also as their
school. In the Second Report of the Commissioners
of Public Instruction of 1835 there
is record of school held in the abbey of
Ballintubber when Patrick Hindley was the
teacher. The number of pupils on roll was
sixty-six and the programme of instruction
included "reading, writing, arithmetic,
book-keeping, mensuration and the Roman
Catholic Cathechism". For the record, it is
worth mentioning that for this extensive
programme of instruction, his payment is
mentioned as "payment by the children
from 1s. to 5s. per quarter" which averages
the princely sum of £32 per annum. In
the Ordnance Survey Letters, John
O'Donovan refers to meeting this same
schoolmaster whom he calls "Old
Hennelly" from whom he learned much of
the history and traditions of the abbey.
No record of the history of the abbey of
Ballintubber would be complete without
mention of the notorious priest-hunter,
Sean na Sagart--John of the Priests. His
name was John Mullowney and his grave is
still pointed out in the cemetery adjoining
Right: Detail of three of the
Apostles at the lower part of
the tomb. Saint Andrew can
be identified by the cross on
the right
Left: Renaissance tomb of the First
Viscount Mayo who died in 1629
Right, Top Picture: Detail of head
on top of tomb
Two Lower Pictures: First part of
inscription on the tomb centre line
shows Tioboid na Long," Thiobod of
the Ships" and another part of the
inscription
the abbey. The examination of Sean na
Sagart before the Justices of the Assizes on
6 April, 1715, is still to be read in the State
Papers contained in Burke's Irish Priests of
the Penal Times.
The first effort at the restoration of the
abbey church was in 1846. It was then the
intention to re-roof the nave as well as the
transepts and we can still see the cut-stone
masonry for new windows which it was
hoped to install. The famine year of l847
caused the population of Ireland to fall by
millions and all work on the abbey had to
cease. The people still continued to attend
Mass in the unroofed abbey, and it is of
this period we have the photographs which
show the people assisting at Mass kneeling
on the grass-covered ground. Forty years
later another generation resumed the work
of restoration. Help and assistance came
from many quarters, even from people
who had no connection whatever with the
parish. Restoration of an Irish abbey, then
seven centuries old, in which the praises
of God had never ceased, even during the
penal days, captured the imagination of the
public and tugged at the heartstrings of
many an exile, proud of his Irish heritage.
The present roof was erected under the
supervision of George Ashlin, the eminent
Dublin architect, helped by the munificence
of James Talbot Power of Leopardstown
Park, Dublin, and other generous benefactors.
Father James Browne was parish
priest when the first efforts at restoration
were made in l846, while the name of
Father Thomas Reidy, then a curate in
the parish, will always be remembered for
his work in 1889.
We have often heard of the heroic
struggle of the Irish people to keep the
Faith in spite of dungeon, fire and sword.
Nothing emphasises more for us this fact
than the story of Ballintubber Abbey. For
two hundred and thirty-six years the people
here were attending Mass in the unroofed
abbey exposed to the cold and the wind and
the rain. This is not mere conjecture; the
On Left: North transept.
Archway in right
wall opens on side
chapel
Below: Side altars of
Saint Patrick and the
Sacred Heart; the altar
of the Sacred Heart is
made from the tombs of
the abbots
Saint Patrick's abbey as it is today. On left of the building can be seen in the
distance the outline of Croagh Patrick
photographs of 1865 show the congregation
kneeling on the grass-covered ground;
the priest has finished Mass; the vestments
may be seen on the altar while the priest
continues the instruction of the children.
Though the Mass is over, the people still
continue to kneel, drinking in the Word of
God. In this modern age of heated, airconditioned
churches, it is good for us to
meditate on what our forefathers endured
to practise the Faith which Patrick planted
so deeply in Baile tobair Phadraig-the
townland of the well of Patrick.
Ballintubber Abbey deserves well of the
Irish nation at home and abroad. Over
seven centuries of our national history are
enshrined in its strong grey walls. It stands
to-day a symbol of the victory of the things
of the spirit over the powers of evil that
tried so often to destroy it. 1966 will see the
75oth anniversary of its foundation. How
appropriate if by then this abbey which is
one of the glories of our nation is restored
in full to its former glory!
The words of a great Irish poet of the
eighteenth century seem appropriate to
complete this account of indestructible
Ballintubber Abbey:
"I mainistir naomh beidh ceir ar lasadh
againn
Is eaglais De go salmach sóch
Ag canadh Te Deum gan baol na eagla
Ce do bhéir gur searbh an sceal."
In an abbey of saints we shall yet have waxen
tapers lighting
And God's Church Joyful with psalmody,
Singing a Te Deum without fear or cause for
fear,
Albeit to tyrants that be bitter news.
Eóin Ruadh Ó Suilleabhain (1748-84).
Stone found inserted in the south transept of the abbey. On it
are the letters Gillabr which Petri says was originally
Gillabrenin
