No programme of economic development will be successful, unless the people have the will to work, and are prepared to accept the living standards to which their efforts entitle them. This means, in particular, that wage standards must be realistic, having regard to the level of productivity in this country and the need for ensuring competitive costs per unit of output. 
Programme for Economic Expansion, November, 1958; Part I. Par. 9 

The above statement in the Introduction to the 1959-64 Five-Year Economic Expansion
Programme echoed similar sentiments in the Introduction to the Economic Development
study which assembled the facts, estimates and principles on which the programme
was based. There it was stated: "A concerted and comprehensive programme aimed at a steady
progress in material welfare, even though supported by the Churches and other leaders
of opinion, could only be successful if the individual members of the community were
realistic and patriotic enough to accept the standard of living produced by their own exertions
here, even if it should continue for some time to be lower than the standard available
abroad. Otherwise the possibility of economic progress scarcely exists". (chap. I, par. 13).
In other words, while planning for expansion, the Government pleaded also for consumption 
restraint. Four years later, the emphasis is
still on the same note-wage earners and
businessmen are being asked to keep their
living standard or consumption demands
within the limit set by Irish economic circumstances.
Indeed, it is probably true to say
that in so far as national economic policy
has been consistent over the past forty years,
it has been in its continual emphasis on the
need for restraint in wages' and profits'
demands.
It is also probably true to say that being
"realistic and patriotic enough to accept
the standard of living produced by their
own exertions here" is something that Irish
people over those years have found very
hard to achieve. Again and again, Governments
have had to introduce restrictive
measures to repair damage being caused
by efforts to consume more than current
economic circumstances allowed. The
people have not been "realistic and patriotic
enough" of their own free will; in one way
or another, they have been forced to restrain
themselves.
That is surely a fact of no little significance.
It seems to indicate that Government
leaders and advisers have themselves been
lacking in realism in hoping that Irish people
would be patriotic enough in that respect.
It is arguable that we would today have
a much healthier structure of public administration,
and, indeed, a sounder structure
of private business and social life, if in the
past Government economic programmes
had been formulated and executed on the
assumption that "individual members of
the community were" not "realistic and
patriotic enough to accept the standard of
living produced by their own exertions
here."
Perhaps, then, it is a bit late now to reconsider,
as I shall in this essay, the realism
of expecting us to accept Irish consumption
standards, when higher standards are
available abroad. Of course, there is more
than the question of realism involved. There
is also the philosophical, ethical question
of whether, in any case, patriotic conduct
demands that we should restrain ourselves
to the extent demanded by accepting Irish
consumption standards. It has not been
proven, I shall suggest, that patriotism
demands such sacrifice, and, therefore, the
tendency of Irish people to be ''unpatriotic"
in that respect may not be as alarming a
fault as is usually taken for granted.
Certainly the justification for appeals for
restraint needs to be studied afresh, if only
to establish clear-cut convictions related
to such appeals.
The present time (mid-1962) happens
to be a particularly appropriate one for this
kind of reconsidering, since appeals for restraint
are being issued, and are likely to be
issued with renewed vigour, on the grounds
of realism and patriotism. Close on the heels
of the substantial increases in incomes
achieved by industrial and construction
workers in recent years, especially in 1961-
62, all other categories of employers and
employees, including those connected with
farming, are pressing strongly and with
some success for corresponding additions
to their profits, salaries and wages. The
whole movement promises to cause budgetary
and balance of payments difficulties,
for the alleviation of which incomes and
consumption restraint will be deemed
necessary. Such restraint, always necessary
to make savings available for directing
capital resources into productive channels,
will be shown to have special investment
value in the light of "the challenge of the
Common Market."
Faced with such immediate uses for restraint,
practical political and business
leaders will hardly have much inclination
to reconsider the grounds in realism and
patriotism for their appeals. Even if it were
shown that their appeals were based on
false assumptions and were likely, therefore,
to prove ineffective in practice, such practical
men are not likely to be impressed, and
are more likely to regard as inopportune
invitations to indulge in reappraisals. Yet,
though those immediate pressures make
short-sighted thinking understandable,
surely those privileged to guide our destinies
could profitably envisage a wider array of
issues. It behoves especially those currently
preparing the 1964-69 Economic Expansion
Programme to give second thoughts
to the reliance which can be placed on our
disposition to restrain our demands for
higher and higher consumption levels.
The eve of the embracing of a link with
the European Economic Community is
surely a moment for profound, long-term
thinking by Irish people. At least, the
results of the link look like being profound
-so why not let the study of this critical,
related issue equal them in depth?
It should be recognised, of course, that
the problems created by the need for restraint
are not by any means peculiar to
Ireland. In general, people everywhere tend
to want to enjoy higher consumption
standards than their personal circumstances,
or the economic conditions of their areas,
can afford. Though highly developed economies
like those of the United States, Britain
or Germany also find appeals for restraint
necessary, the problem is particularly acute
in developing economies like those in South
America, Africa and parts of Asia. The
problem is as old as mankind, even if it
has become more pronounced in modern
times, due to the ambition of so many
people to advance from low to high consumption
levels in relatively short periods
of time.
As a general rule, it can be said that
economic progress depends on the exercise
of a degree of consumption restraint, the
degree being in an inverse relation to the
degree of development of an economy.
In particular cases, of course, it could be
shown that the stimulation of a strong
desire for consumption would be a key
factor in initiating a process of economic
development, though even in those cases
orderly growth would eventually make
the general rule relevant
Yet, while the general need for restraint
is clear enough, realism and patriotism
would appear to call for different solutions
to the problem, when the psychology,
attitude to life, and circumstances of the
inhabitants of different countries are taken
into account. In this essay, I am confining my
study of leadership and restraint to the
circumstances of the Irish people, though
it could easily be shown, I think, that my
conclusions could usefully be related to the
problems created by restraint everywhere.
Though I have only the Twenty-six Counties
of Ireland in mind, I think that the conclusions
hold for the Six-County Northern
Ireland economic unit too.
Incidently, since the problems associated
with securing production standards suitable
for E.E.C.conditions are being comprehensively
examined by Government and other
survey teams, they are not expressly
considered in this essay.
The problems for Government leadership
posed by the need for restraint obviously
take different shapes, according to whether
it is envisaged that restraint should obtain
for a relatively short period of time or that
it should be a permanent feature of people's
conduct. Usually it is temporary "pauses"
in demands for increases in consumption
that are asked for, though the Irish case has
been complicated by what may be called a
dual-purpose national policy which,
according to the Economic Development
study, would find it convenient to have
restraint on a permanent basis.
Appeals for restraint, on a short-term
basis, are those with which we are most
familiar in Ireland. Emergency conditions - like
those of the 'twenties, when the aftermath
of the independence and civil war
struggles, coupled with the depressed
condition of traditional Irish export markets
made economic recovery a slow process;
or those of the 'thirties, when export
markets were both depressed and affected
by "economic war" measures; or those
of the 'forties, when export and import
markets were adversely affected by World
War II and its aftermath-can be used to
show the necessity for such restraint.
Without alarming emergency conditions
occasions can arise, as in the mid-' fifties,
when unfavourable export and import
prices cause balance of payments difficulties,
thereby demonstrating the need for restraint
until the trade situation improves.
When a Government is trying to arrange
a high level of public and private investment,
consumption restraint can be very
convenient and even vitally necessary.
Furthermore, when a particular section of
workers, like, say, public utility workers,
are exploiting a powerful bargaining position
to advance their living standards, they
can be asked to restrain their demands,
while arrangements are being made to cater
for less privileged members of the community.
The need for short-term restraint
in those circumstances poses its own
problems for Government leadership, but
generally they are less difficult than the
problems associated with leadership for
long-term restraint. People are aware of
the emergency conditions and the need
for investment. They also know that they
can hope for better things after a relatively
short time. Leaders can be specific about the
items of consumption-e.g. those containing
imported materials-and the categories
of workers-e.g. those producing goods
for export, or those already enjoying relatively
high living standards-when issuing
the appeals.
It is an entirely different matter when
long-term restraint is being sought. When
suggesting that the Irish people should be
"realistic and patriotic enough to accept
the standard of living produced by their
own exertions here," the Economic Development
study added very significantly "even
if it [the Irish living standard] should
continue for some time to be lower than
the standard available abroad." Elsewhere
(chap. 2, par. 7) it suggested that "output
in Ireland does not suffice-and however
much improved may never suffice-to
support British standards [of living],"
thereby implying that the disparity between
Irish and foreign standards would be a
permanent feature of Irish life.
In an essay shortly after the publication
of that study, [The Price of Irish Economic
Development: Studies, Winter, 1959], the
present writer examined the validity of that
implication, and concluded that it was
generally accepted by Irish economists to
be true. However, due to a very significant
recent change in national economic policy
intimately associated with the decision to
seek a link with the European Economic
Community, that conclusion does not seem
to be true any longer. It is worth dwelling
on this point, however briefly, since the
significance of the change in policy does
not appear to be generally understood.
The essential point in the change lies in
the decision to pursue a free-trade rather
than a protectionist foreign trade policy.
While trading between those nations
involved in the European Economic Community
will be regulated, after much
bargaining, during the transitional stages,
it is freely acknowledged that those measures
are meant to usher in an era of free-trading
between the nations of Europe and,
indeed, of the whole world eventually.
Ireland is now about to embark on the
road to free-trade, after forty years of
protection.
Whatever about the merits and demerits
of that epoch-making change in national
economic policy, it is a significant fact. The
change is being made to enable Irish people
to enjoy European consumption levels, and
there is no doubt about it but that international
free-trading, with adequate safeguards
against dumping, is the only way
to secure the international specialisation
of labour which secures the highest incomes
possible for people everywhere.
At the same time, it must be recognised
that the decision involves the abandonment
of a significant aspect of Irish population
policy. Hitherto, we have striven to do two
things at the same time-raise consumption
levels and raise the population total. In
future, by means of free-trading, the
Government intends to concentrate primarily
and, in effect, well-nigh exclusively,
on raising consumption levels, and to
let the population total be a residual
consequence of free-trading operations. It
could not be otherwise, since free-trading
competition and international mobility of
labour will demand that output per worker
everywhere and in all occupations will
approximate to the same level, and a rigid
population policy in Ireland or in any other
country would be incompatible with that
requirement.
What the eventual Irish population
result will be is completely w1predictable
at this stage; the only thing that is certain
is that the incomes and consumption habits
of those living in Ireland will approximate
more closely to the European and world
level than at present.
The important implication of that shift
in national policy for this study is that it
means that the need for a permanent policy
of consumption restraint disappears. Its
permanence heretofore was due to the
objective of raising Irish consumption levels
being burdened with the aim of increasing
(or, which is the same thing, lowering the
rural and national migration and depopulation
figures) the population total too.
A policy of protectionist trading only made
sense because of that dual purpose policy.
The free-trading solution to the problem
of raising consumption levels could have
been applied at any time-apart from
emergency situations-over the past forty
years, but we elected to use protection to
further a population policy alongside the
rise in living standards. What does not seem
to have been generally appreciated, though,
is that protection could secure that population
result, only if Irish people would be
permanently content with distinctively Irish
consumption standards.
Because Irish production in all sectors
would generally be operating on a smaller
scale than would be the case under free-trading
conditions requiring international
specialisation, standards in labour productivity,
and therefore in incomes, would
necessarily be lower than the levels obtaining
abroad under free-trade conditions. To be
content under those circumstances, Irish
people would need to be content with
relative consumption restraint; their consumption
levels might be much better than
those enjoyed by their forefathers, but they
would be below those available abroad. It
was with that in mind, apparently, that the
contributors to Economic Development and
the Government in the Programme for
Economic Expansion issued the plea for long-term
restraint.
It would appear, however, that the E.E.C.
decision was, in fact, made on grounds
with little direct bearing on the issue of
restraint. Our European trading partners
wish to do business on E.E.C. trading terms,
so, it is argued, we have no option but to
fall in line, especially when a consequence
may be greater scope for utilizing the
potential of our farmlands, by far our
greatest national asset.
Besides, it is suggested, we wish, as a nation,
to be associated with an ambitious effort
to promote political harmony among the
peoples of Europe. Those considerations
appear to have overshadowed the fact that
the abandoning of consumption restraint
was also involved. Perhaps the idea of such
restraint had never been entertained
seriously, in any case. Before the realistic
appraisal unfolded in Economic Development
it appears that Government leaders were
under the impression that restraint would
be a short-term affair. At least, the general
Irish public do not seem to have realised
that long-term restraint would be their lot,
and no very noticeable attempt was made,
under national leadership, to encourage
them to accept such restraint as an alternative
to continued rural and national depopulation. In spite of the formal recognition given
the conclusion in Economic Development,
national leadership seems to have assumed
that the Irish people would not like such
long-term restraint in consumption.
Certainly experiences to date, especially
in 1961-62, have indicated that a large
proportion of Irish income earners are
determined, at all costs, to enjoy incomes
corresponding to foreign, especially British,
productivity levels, rather than those corresponding
to Irish protection-determined
productivity levels. In the face of that
determined demand, Government leadership
would appear finally to have abandoned
even the hope of their effecting, through
statesmanship, long-term restraint. The
enthusiasm, on the part of the Government,
for E.E.C.-style free-trade would appear to
reflect, in no small way, very understandable
relief due to the abandoning of that hope.
Perhaps the Government and their advisers
were right; perhaps it was both
unrealistic and unethical to expect that Irish
people would be "realistic and patriotic
enough" to endure consumption restraint
permanently. But, perhaps, also, the abandoning
of the project reflects a radical defect
in Irish political leadership. It would not
have been a popular policy, and, in fact,
beyond the formal recognition of the point
in Economic Development and the Programme
for Economic Expansion, little effort was made
by national leaders to execute such a policy.
If the Irish people had been encouraged
to consider the idea exhaustively, and had
rejected it, there would be some justification
for abandoning it; but popular rejection
appears to have been taken for granted,
without an adequate test.
The suspicion that Irish political leadership
may be seriously defective in this respect
would appear to gain in strength, when one
considers that allowing Irish consumption
standards and population levels to be determined
by E.E.C.-style, free-trade will
involve little or no moral leadership on the
part of Irish politicians. Whereas enticing
the Irish people to enjoy life on a basis of
long-term restraint would place considerable
demands on their statesmanship, allowing
E.E. C. commitments to determine the
result will impose no such demands; largely
it will be a matter of drifting with the
European tide.
Perhaps European consumption standards
will be to our satisfaction, and their enjoyment
will be worth the displacement
of the Irish population which may be
involved. Will the mentality underlying
the new way of life compare well with the
attitude towards living preserved, often
at great sacrifice, by Irish people for centuries?
Or are we now, after a short experimental
period of forty years, abandoning
sacred values blindly, mainly because we
have not national leadership of the calibre
needed to preserve them? We don't know.
In our concern with enjoying modern consumption
standards, we are not judging the
value of those standards or what their
enjoyment is displacing. We are like people
who have become dependent on drugs and
are determined to have more supplies; we
prefer not to think, and our leaders appear
to be content to fit in with the ''general will"
in democratic fashion, instead of assessing
the value of that "will" in a statesmanlike
manner.
It is that lack of open, conscious study
of the significance of abandoning the
idea of long-term restraint, with its consequences
for national policy as a whole,
particularly in relation to the link-up with
the E.E.C., that is rather disconcerting.
The most obvious excuse for abandoning
the idea of long-term restraint is that it
just is not possible for leaders to secure
such a result in a free democracy. The
Russians can, and are, doing it, because
their leaders have all the powers of a
totalitarian regime. Certainly with a party-politics
system of election, with rival
candidates promising higher and higher
consumption levels as rewards for securing
votes, such a policy poses embarrassing
problems for practical politicians. Yet
statesmanship and electioneering ingenuity
can overcome those obstacles-provided
the people themselves really want restraint.
It is worth, then, examining closely what
may be called the consumption psychology
of the Irish people to discern their attitude
towards restraint.
Without producing figures to indicate
the proportion of their incomes which
they allocate to consumption goods-accurate
figures are not readily available, in
any case-it is probably true to say that
present-day Irish people have a strong inbuilt
inclination to consume at a high level.
A few decades ago, Irish people, outside
the small sophisticated social classes, found
mainly in Dublin and other urban areas,
had not such expensive consumption tastes.
They were content with simple foods,
serviceable clothing and housing, low-cost
education, and their cultural interests and
entertainments were largely home-made,
involving spending only on odd occasions
and then not at a high level. Whether their
tastes were inexpensive, because they hadn't
the money to spend more, or not, the fact
is that the consumption tendency did not
operate with expensive effects. Now their
ambitions, at all social and age levels,
especially among those in the fifteen-thirty-
five age group, are aimed at wider
and more expensive consumption targets.
In foods, clothing, housing, transport
facilities, education and entertainment there
is a growing element of status-symbol
rather than purely functional demand.
Whether that growth in consumption
ambitions is healthy or otherwise is a
matter not being judged at this stage; the
important thing is that the ambitions are
facts which Irish leaders, considering a
policy of long-term restraint, must bear in
mind to be realistic. It is also worth
noting that the growth is not confined to
Dublin and other traditionally sophisticated
areas; the sons and daughters of humble,
small-scale farmers, general labourers,
tradesmen and traders throughout the
whole of Ireland are gradually becoming
involved in the tendency towards higher
consumption.
Faced with those facts, the reluctance of
political leaders to advocate restraint is
understandable, even if vote-catching did
not rule out the idea without the help of
such evidence. Nevertheless, it is of no
little importance to be aware of the factors
responsible for that growth in consumption
ambitions; only on the basis of such an
analysis could leaders hope to do anything
about affecting the growth. Again, no
scientific attempt has been made to discern
such factors, and the following summary
of nine causal elements in the phenomenon
is necessarily based on limited, if painstaking,
personal observation.
Firstly, there is a great awareness of
world-wide consumption habits among
Irish people now; through personal experiences
of living abroad, through the
reports of acquaintances who have been
abroad, through the printed word, and
through the cinematic, television, radio,
and glossy magazine representations of
living habits in the prosperous English-speaking
parts of the world, present-day
Irish people are vividly familiar with
foreign consumption habits.
Secondly, the "keep up with the Jones's"
tendency, traditionally strong among Irish
people because of being made feel inferior
by an "ascendancy" class, is being stimulated
further by the tantalizing nature of
the foreign consumption standards being
displayed for their contemplation.
Thirdly, there is the continuous and
powerful work of advertising's "hidden
persuaders" deliberately aimed at convincing
Irish people that they should be
enjoying such consumption standards.
Those three factors alone would seem to
contribute with tremendous effect to the
growth of the desire to enjoy high levels of
consumption, particularly when they are
allied with two factors which show Irish
people that they can afford to satisfy their
desires.
One is the growing effects of education
being experienced by present-day Irish
people. Their higher level of general
education prompts them to think that
they should be enjoying income and
consumption standards conventionally
associated with people of their educational
standing [such is the traditional Irish
attitude, that an educated person who does
not live prosperously is accounted as being
"odd" in some way]. That general education,
largely unretarded by cultural inhibitions,
gives them the social poise and
adaptability which their forefathers lacked,
but which they can now use profitably as
they seek highly-paid posts.
The other is the ease, the fruits of years
of experience, with which Irish people
can migrate. The whole of the English-speaking
world is virtually open to them,
and the growing popularity of foreign
languages is opening up new territories on
the Continent and elsewhere. Invitations
from relatives and recruitment schemes,
often backed by passage-paid and subsidized
accommodation perquisites, are
beckoning them to foreign places affected
by labour shortages; and modern transport
facilities make contact with their Irish
interests very convenient.
Because of those education and migration
factors, then, generally speaking no Irish
person need be without up-to-date consumption
enjoyments. Without criteria
which would enable individuals to judge
intelligently the worth of such consumption
satisfactions, it is easy to see why
people anywhere would automatically
incline towards sampling them. And four
factors would appear to leave individual
Irish people very largely without such
criteria.
One is the fact that they are unaccustomed
to assessing the value of those
enjoyments on a basis of natural ethics.
Their ethical evaluations have tended to be
decided for them by their religious
superiors, without any need for the exercises
in ethical judgement which those with
little or no religion find necessary.
A second is the lack of precision in
regard to the obligations arising out of
their duty to be patriotic. They are familiar
with their obligations in regard to military
action, but they are so much without
guidance in regard to personal consumption
tastes that they are, in effect, not aware
of any obligations whatever.
A third is the lack of precise indications
in the matter from their religion. The
general exhortation to avoid being excessively
materialistic when consuming
is clear enough, but positively there is
little effective guidance in regard to the
extent to which it is necessary to be
materialistic for religious purposes; so they
tend to adopt whatever standards are
conventional.
Finally, there is the lack of precision in
regard to evaluating entertainments and
cultural activities. With the official effort to
promote cultural appreciation more or
less confined to the revival of a language
from which they get little or no aesthetic
satisfaction, young Irish people are faced
with a cultural vacuum which they
automatically fill by sampling the modern
entertainments, and status-symbols-often
"escapist" in nature-so readily available.
Those pastimes become part of their
consumption habits, especially during
leisure hours, and make them aware of
associated features of modern consumption
standards.
When that four-fold lack of criteria is
combined with the first three factors
enticing them to consume, and the second
two factors indicating that they can
financially afford to do so, the phenomenon
of inflated Irish consumption ambitions
seems to be an unavoidable consequence.
The surprising thing is that the determination
to achieve those ambitions has not
been more pronounced, though the relentless rank-and-file pressure for higher wages
during 1961-62 would seem to reflect the
attitude in its most striking terms yet.
Probably its most vigorous manifestation
has yet to come.
In the light of the foregoing analysis of
Irish consumption psychology, it is easy to
see the formidable difficulties confronting
Irish political leaders considering a policy
of restraint, whether of a temporary or a
permanent nature. It is almost like trying to
stop the incoming tide in the manner of
King Canute. In fact, as already pointed out
in this essay, the Government appears to
have despaired of effecting such restraint,
and is prepared to allow E.E.C.-style
free-trade to deal with the consequences.
That amounts to side-stepping the
responsibilities of self-government. Besides,
varying degrees of short-term restraint will
be necessary for co-operation within E.E.C.,
and Irish leaders will have to advise on its
nature and how to secure it. So, the problem
must be considered again. The obvious
starting-point is the results of attempts
of that nature made hitherto; they should
provide lessons from which we can learn.
Since the idea of long-term restraint has
only been put before the Irish people in a
timid fashion, if, indeed, at all, we have
little evidence of results to examine. The
Economic Development study mentioned that,
in compensation for the restraint involved
in accepting Irish living standards, people
would find that "there are many countervailing
advantages in living in Ireland."
(chap. l, par. 12). Neither that study, nor
commentaries on it, attempted to outline
the "countervailing advantages" in an
attractive way, so there is no evidence of
how Irish people would react to the idea of
accepting them as adequate compensation
for restraint.
The reluctance to campaign on the basis
of those con1pensating advantages would
appear to indicate that the Government
did not expect that they would meet with
popular approval. While Irish people do
value such as the peacefulness, the moral
atmosphere, the friendliness, the pure air,
the moderate climate, the fresh food, and
the pleasant pastimes to be found in Ireland,
they also like to be able to sample modern
consumption as well, when they feel that
way inclined.
It is worth noting in passing that Irish
people who have experienced life abroad,
especially in crowded cities, easily develop
a nostalgic feeling for those "countervailing
advantages," and they often return
home to benefit from them without the
aid of many features of modern consumption.
Perhaps their example could have
been used to stimulate a similar attitude
among those without foreign experiences.
Of course, the national leaders and "pillars
of society" generally would have had to
show example in that respect themselves.
At any rate, the experiment has not been
tried.
Efforts to secure short-term restraint have
yielded some results. The most suitable
test-with likely future circumstances in
mind-took place during the 1957- 59
period, when the Government introduced
restrictions to rectify balance-of-payments
difficulties, and called for voluntary restraint
while doing so. The difficulties were
rectified, as fiscal policy left the people
with no alternative; but an abnormally
high level of emigration took place at the
same time, thereby indicating that the
people preferred to enjoy the desired
consumption levels abroad rather than
make-do with what was available in
Ireland. Prolonged unemployment made
that step unavoidable for many, no doubt,
but large numbers in employment departed
simply because they did not want to endure
the relatively low level of consumption
imposed on them. Political leaders could
not induce them to be patient.
To understand why people were impatient,
it is necessary to discern their
attitude towards the pronouncements of
such leaders. It is probably true to say that
a very large majority, certainly of the
under-thirties, do not bother noticing,
much less heeding, the leaders' statements.
So preoccupied are they with enjoying
life, and seeking to enjoy it more, that
they normally do not take time off to
study such pronouncements. They are
only concerned with immediate pleasures,
and in so far as they look ahead, they think
about employment prospects. They find
that they must rely on an "every man for
himself" approach towards getting sufficiently
remunerative jobs, and they are
deeply conscious all the time that the
prospects available abroad mean that they
need not be urgently concerned with
Government attempts to provide employment
in Ireland. They feel insignificant
in relation to the national issues involved
in politics, so they prefer not to worry
about them. Even when they try to
understand the leaders' statements, they
are confronted with economic arguments
which, in fact, very few people in the
country can understand properly. There
would be some chance if all leaders and
commentators agreed on the need for
restraint, but the Opposition of the day are
usually concerned with pointing out that
it is unnecessary. When distinguished non-political
figures join in the Opposition
chorus, the confusion is sufficient to destroy
the last remnants of respect for those
official pronouncements.
Appeals to be patriotic are usually in the
shape of exhortations to work hard or
skilfully-a thing they are prepared to do,
if they get in return enough money to
provide the desired consumption standards
for themselves and their dependants-but
they look in vain for a convincing justification,
on grounds of patriotism, for abstaining
from certain forms of consumption. In the
midst of such muddled thinking at the leadership
level, it is natural for them to take
refuge in a cynicism which absolves them
from heeding the pleas for restraint.
They have been promised so much
"prosperity around the corner" by politicians,
that they do not believe them any
more. They know that many are living
prosperously while they are supposed to
restrain themselves; and they take readily
to the popular impression that political
patronage and unscrupulous dealings are in
no small way responsible for the circumstances
of those restraint-free people.
With an attitude like that, it is not
surprising that Irish people, especially the
lively, talented post-Treaty generation, are
impatient with restraint, even on a short-term
basis. They also happen to be experiencing
the results of growing disillusionment
with the fruits of political
independence. It was generally believed,
with little or no economic justification,
that independence would bring prosperity
and the consequent elimination of the
need to emigrate. The reality has been a
bitter pill for the new generation, and
indeed the old, to swallow.
A new factor contributing to impatience
has appeared in recent years, alongside the
promoting of the Government Programme
for Economic Expansion. To stimulate enthusiasm
for that programme, the Government
and newspaper commentators have
been issuing optimistic statements about
prospects, in an effort to encourage
businessmen to invest and workers to
take kindly to labour productivity measures.
Export achievements and new industrial
projects have been greeted as harbingers
of prosperity, without reference to their
precise worth or the real possibility of their
being partly due to fortuitous and temporary
circumstances. That campaign has
achieved an expansionist attitude among
many businessmen and workers, to some
extent; but it has also made them feel that
they are now entitled to rewards in the
form of the desired living standards. A
continuation of the pleas for restraint is
something they were not told to expect,
and they have little patience with the
idea. If the possibility of E.E.C.-style
discipline were not at hand to talk about,
something like it would have had to be
invented to cater for the results of the
over-optimistic predictions.
Finally, there is the fact that appeals for
restraint and patience, on the grounds of
social justice, appear to fall on deaf ears.
When it is stated that excessive wage
demands and achievements on the part of
some sections of the community-Irish
public utility and industrial workers, say
- will hurt others through higher taxation,
redundancy and through lowering the
purchasing power of those living on fixed
incomes or with little bargaining power
to use against their employers, those
supposed to be at fault appear to remain
unmoved. They feel that wealth and incomes
could be distributed more equitably in
Ireland, in any case, and that pressure
from them is the only way to achieve that.
It is the task of organised labour to seek
higher wages for themselves; employers
are well able to take care of their interests,
and it is the job of the Government, by
means of social welfare legislation, to attend
to those who are hurt in the process. They
can point to increases in labour productivity
as justifying their demands, and to the fact
that, despite protestations to the contrary
beforehand, employers do in fact manage to
pay the higher wage rates conceded.
When it is pointed out that the fruits of
higher labour productivity in manufacturing
should be shared out, in lower prices,
among all Irish people rather than among
the privileged few engaged in those
industries, they prefer to think that they
have no obligations in that respect. By
their industrial successes, they prompt
those elsewhere engaged to seek correspondingly
higher wages, and they prefer
not to think about the consequences of
doing so. Arguing from the labour productivity
increases achieved in the past,
they reckon that similar future increases
will occur, so they base wage claims on
such forecast, when past cost-of-living
increases are not available to support their
claims. Making such forecasts involves
estimates based on possibilities hard to
calculate accurately, even if there were
agreement among Irish economists and that
their reports were respected. There is little
such agreement and respect, and since it is
usually official policy to depict prospects
in the most optimistic light, the workers
are encouraged to follow the same line.
By achieving substantial wage increases,
wage earners in fact make it necessary for
all employers to economise in labour costs,
thereby often causing redundancy and
increasing the necessity for migration;
those results followed the 1955-56 substantial
wage increases. How do those
seeking higher wages reconcile that with
their observance of the rules of social
justice?
In the first place, they are loathe to
admit that redundancy and migration are
necessary consequences of their action, and
they generally avoid the subject. After all,
they are being encouraged by the Government
to facilitate improvements in labour
productivity, and the Government also
prefers to gloss over the redundancy
effects of such improvements. It is hoped
that increases in exports and in output
generally, allied to the establishment of new
businesses, will absorb the redundant
workers; so the labour leaders place the
responsibility for dealing with redundancy
in the hands of the Government.
Besides, even if they were prepared to
admit that redundancy and migration were
a necessary consequence of their action, they
would find it hard to discern how their
part in the process is contrary to the principles
of social justice. Migration from an
area is, in fact, a way to improve the
consumption standards of those remaining
in the area, and the present writer has been
unable to find any treatment of social
principles, Catholic or otherwise, which
condemns such a solution to the problem of
raising standards.
In short, the conclusions of this section
can be summed up by saying that, with
Irish people in their present mood, there
appears to be no way in which Irish leaders
could persuade the people to be content with
a policy of voluntary restraint, whether temporary
or permanent. They simply want to
enjoy modern consumption standards, regardless
of the consequences. In effect, they
do not want a dual-purpose national
economic policy; they want the single
result of higher standards, and they are
prepared to let the population numbers be
a residual consequence of that. So the
Government, in adopting that single-purpose
policy in relation to a link with
E.E.C., are summing up their wishes
accurately
So far this study of leadership and
restraint has been conducted strictly on the
lines of pragmatic realism; it is a matter of
what leaders can actually do in Irish
circumstances, not what they should, in
conscience, do. They would all like to have
restraint, since that would hold out hopes of
realizing the much-prized national goal of a
higher population total, involving a stemming
and reversing of the migration flow
from rural and provincial areas and from
the country as a whole. But since those
wishes cannot be reconciled with the
wishes of the people for modern consumption
standards, those practitioners of the
"art of the possible" have no option,
apparently, but to fall in with the "general
will" and gear national economic affairs
to the realization of that single purpose.
It is now time to attempt an ethical
judgement on the wisdom of that giving-away
to the "general will." Here it is
necessary to outline a number of general
principles to guide such a judgement.
In the first place, there does not appear
to be anything ethically sacred about having
a given number of people inhabiting an
area such as Ireland. The fact of a country
being inhabited by a few thousand or a
few million people does not mean that it
should always be inhabited to that degree.
Chance historical circumstances, not all of
them satisfactory, would have determined
the population density up to the present,
and those circumstances might have
changed. For instance, studies have shown
that the enormous population expansion
which took place in the first half of the
nineteenth century in Ireland, would hardly
have taken place at all if the Irish people
had not been subjected to conditions of
dire poverty; no longer need the Irish
people endure such suppression, so the
population level could be said to be
righting itself in a most desirable way.
Similarly, but for the "to hell or to
Connaught" edict of the Cromwellian
occupation, it is most unlikely that the
west of the Shannon area, which is poorly
endowed with resources, would ever have
been as populous as it was in the nineteenth
century, or even as it is now; migration
from the area in recent decades could be
said to be an overdue reversal of something
which should never have taken place.
The migration of peoples across countries,
continents and oceans has always been a
marked feature of human history, and it was
generally accepted as a normal aspect of
human affairs, until exaggerated notions of
nationalism, which seem to have affected
Irish thinking greatly, saw in such movements
evidence of injustice and racial
failings. In short, the dictum "every man has
a right to a living in his own country"'
appears to be false and can hardly be
accepted as a general ethical principle.
In the second place, surely what is
ethically important is not where people
happen to live, but that they enjoy satisfactory
living conditions wherever they
live. Unless a country, such as Ireland, can
provide people with suitable consumption
standards, then the national leaders have no
obligation or right to promote a policy of
restraint, by voluntary or other means, to
keep the people in that country. The
pragmatic study unfolded above showed
that people instinctively reject such a policy,
in any" case; and their instincts are right, in
that they are entitled to suitable living
conditions objectively related to the needs
of their personal lives, and not subjectively
determined by the limited resources of
their particular national economy, when
their objective needs can be more
adequately catered for in other areas.
That is a principle to which Irish political
leaders and commentators appear to have
failed to give due weight. Their attitude in
the past has been understandable, in that
they hoped that the needs of the people
would be adequately catered for by means
of economic development, and they knew
too little about economic analysis to see
that their hopes were based on illusions
[e.g. the Evidence placed before the
1934-38 Banking Commission is a striking
illustration of such illusory thinking among
eminent, and otherwise intelligent people].
With the better understanding of Irish
economic possibilities which prevails today,
there is less room for misguided thinking
in this matter. We can now estimate with
reasonable accuracy the consumption
standards which will be available to Irish
people in the foreseeable future, through
their own exertions. We can then judge
whether those standards will be satisfactory,
or whether further migration will be
necessary, and should be promoted, to make
them satisfactory. That involves accepting
this second ethical principle that where
people live is only secondary to the
primary need to enable them to live well.
In the third place, a dual-purpose national
policy, which makes the raising of consumption
standards conditional on raising
the national population total, does not
appear to have ethical justification; priority
must be given to achieving satisfactory
living conditions. By all means, let there
be striving to have the population rising
too, but efforts in that direction must stop
short when they interfere with the improving
of living conditions.
It is true that, in certain circumstances,
economic development which would
eventually provide such desired conditions
could benefit from pressure of population
numbers in the early stages. But not all
economic circumstances could benefit in
that way. Many developing regions in
South America, Africa and Asia have
potentials needing population pressures to
exploit them, while it seems that, in the
Irish case, such is the nature of the potential
that it can be used to provide satisfactory
living conditions, only after the population
pressure has eased through depopulation.
The adopting of the dual-purpose policy
in Ireland, therefore, may be said to have
been misguided, and ethically unjustified,
if understandable, in view of prejudices
arising from the extreme nationalistic
thinking and the illusory economic ideas
which prevailed. The adoption of the
single-purpose policy now, therefore, seems
to reflect an important change to a new and
more enlightened attitude, unhampered by
blinding prejudices.
In the fourth place, it seems to be
inaccurate and ethically wrong to outline
the objective negatively in terms of securing
restraint; the abstention and moderation
in respect of some items of consumption,
which restraint would involve, must be
shown to secure positive beneficial results
for the happiness of individual members of
the community. To advocate restraint so as
business concerns in the country will have
"competitive costs per unit of output," as the
Programme for Economic Expansion did, is to
subordinate the need for adequate living
conditions to the commercial need to be
competitive. Perhaps being competitive
would indirectly lead to beneficial living
conditions; the Programme did not so
suggest, and, in fact, it provided no proof
that the results would be satisfactory from
that viewpoint, and they have not proved
sufficiently satisfactory. If in the long-run,
competitive production with adequate
wages cannot be achieved, then the production is hardly worth having, and the
people should be told to seek suitable
wages elsewhere.
In fact, in any case, competitive production
with relatively high wages can be
achieved. Some firms might have to disappear
or fit themselves into a larger-scale
production group, and redundancy and
migration might have to take place, in the
process; but the point is that competitive
costs can be achieved without relative
wages restraint. Similarly, wages restraint is
not necessary to enable the "country to survive",
even if it were not ethically undesirable
to suppress individuals' desires for
adequate living standards for such a national
purpose. Higher wages demands might
lead to a smaller population and concomitant
consequences, but the whole
administrative, commercial and social
structure could be re-arranged, perhaps as
part of a united Europe, accordingly, thereby
enabling the Irish political unit to
survive on the basis of the population
remaining.
Attention, therefore, has to be focussed
on the way Irish living will benefit positively
from restraint; restraint itself is not
desirable unless it facilitates the realization
of a greater good. It is not enough to
assume that "countervailing advantages"
will satisfy; there is surely an ethical
obligation to show that they are adequate.
Those four principles would appear to
clear the way for the ethical judgement
relevant to the Irish situation, which sees
the Irish leaders falling in line with the
"general will" to abandon consumption
restraint and pursue higher consumption
standards single-mindedly, more or less
regardless of the consequences for national
and rural population totals. The judgement
would appear to be a simple one: the
leaders are right, provided they are certain
that the consumption standards being
sought serve adequately the well-being of
the Irish people. Provided their living
habits are edifying, it does not matter if
Irish people have to migrate throughout
the world to enjoy what inadequate
resources cannot provide at home.
The restraint problem for Irish leaders
now boils down to ensuring that the living
standard ambitions of the Irish people are
in accord with what is good for their
happiness. A policy of restraint would be
justified, and would have some chance of
success, only if it were directed towards
facilitating the practice of the moral code
which promotes the well-being of the
people.
Immediately the problem is stated that
way, one becomes aware of a radical
defect in Irish political leadership-we are
not accustomed to envisaging the function
of our Government as being primarily
concerned with promoting the observance
of a moral code. In fact, we almost recoil
(nervously) from the very thought.
Yet the rulers of Russia and other
totalitarian regimes make no attempt
whatever to conceal the fact that they are
geared to promoting their conception of
moral well-being among their subjects-and
they often succeed in producing magnificent
practitioners of the natural virtues which
meet with approval in non-totalitarian
regimes. Indeed, it is said that the secret
of Communist achievements lies in the
single-minded promotion of happiness
in accord with a moral code designed
to effect world-wide socialization, just
as the vital weakness in non-Communist
efforts lies in the lack of a precise
moral code. Those non-Communist leaders
must talk vaguely in terms of "higher
living standards" and "freedom" as
objectives, without indicating the kind of
living which they expect freedom and
higher standards to serve.
Irish leaders and the Irish people seem to
be as keen as their Western neighbours to
be imprecise about the moral code they
are observing. It is true that, in fact, the
whole set of regulations embodied in public
legislation, and the approval given various
activities and people, do indicate the
observance of a moral code by the leaders
and people. Legislation, however, following
the British utilitarian tradition, is largely
of a negative nature, designed to prevent
individual citizens from doing harm to
each other, rather than to facilitate positively
the attempts of each citizen to be virtuous
and happy. That negative approach is reflected
in the attitude of Irish leaders, who,
while they are quick to moralise when
condemning crime and illegal action, they
are very, very slow to campaign vigorously
in favour of virtuous living. While it only
reflects the conventional Western attitude,
the negative Irish approach towards promoting
moral happiness seems to have been
pushed to its present extreme by three
historical facts.
The first is experience of being ruled by
the British for so long. The British moral
code was considered reprehensible by the
vast majority of the Irish people, and so far
from expecting or accepting moral guidance
from such rulers, the people made a virtue
of being hostile to the laws and moral
exhortations of their rulers at every
opportunity, a hostility which seems to
have been carried over into the era of
native rule.
A second fact is the dominant place
occupied by religion and the Catholic
Church in Irish life. It is presumed that
since the Church is explicitly concerned
with promoting the observance of a moral
code, political leaders have no positive
function in the matter, apart from abstaining
from legislating or exhorting in a
way contrary to the Church's approved
code. Political leaders, generally, have been
content to acquiesce in that situation, as
it relieves them of the responsibility of
moralizing in a positive way, and they
are glad to have the backing of appropriate
moral statements from prominent Churchmen
occasionally. They are probably not
very confident about their personal abilities
to provide moral guidance with accuracy,
in any case, and they know that if they
make mistakes, and merit Church disapproval,
their political careers will be in
jeopardy; they prefer to take no chances.
It is a consequence, with implications
very, very little appreciated, of the state of
working (as distinct from Constitutional)
relations between the Catholic Church and
the Irish Government, that the Irish people,
who, through the fervent adherence of the
majority to the Catholic Faith, possess a
common moral code to an extent unique
among national groups, are unaccustomed
to having their moral conduct discussed in
detail and to hearing public exhortations to
virtue. The Church prefers to confine pronouncements
to general statements in the
main, eschewing attempts to concretize
them in the Irish situation, while the
Government concretizes moral principles
only when it has no alternative.
The third fact is the existence of a non-Catholic
minority in Ireland-five per cent.
when the Twenty-six County area is
considered, and about twenty-five per cent.
when the Thirty-two County area is
under scrutiny. Not only are the minority
sub-groups divided on matters of religious
principles, but they are also lacking in
agreement among themselves in matters of
natural political philosophy. A Government
promoting the observance of an all-embracing
moral code would, then, be in
continual difficulties showing that that code
was the reasonable one in the circumstances,
whereas no such difficulties of principle
would arise when dealing with Catholics.
To preclude such difficulties, Government
spokesmen naturally try to avoid intelligible
references to moral principles. The
disproportionate ease with which such non-Catholics
can confuse and appear to dominate
public opinion makes the idea of
avoiding comments all the more attractive,
particularly when the politicians in the main
are without the training in philosophical
disputations necessary to display reasonableness.
The fact remains that any attempt to
judge the appropriateness of the consumption
ambitions of the Irish people
simply must start from the acceptance of
the moral purpose of Government; otherwise
nobody has any obligation to worry
about those ambitions, or, indeed, about
their consequences for the Irish people,
in the E.E.C. or elsewhere. In fact, the
very condoning of those ambitions now
implies that they are in accord with an
accepted moral code of some sort, so if not
the Government at least the Catholic
Church must surely satisfy herself that the
code is praiseworthy.
Even when the moral standpoint is
accepted, it is clear that considerable
practical difficulties arise in the attempt to
judge the moral appropriateness of those
ambitions-difficulties which we are without
experience in tackling, simply because
we have not contemplated the problems
facing a Government with an explicit
moral purpose. No doubt, methods for
dealing with them will be found, once we
tackle them, and as a suggestion for
experiment, the following procedure occurs
to the present writer.
First, a distinction could be nude between
the two types of difficulties likely to arise those
concerned with assembling for study
the factual evidence indicating Irish consumption
behaviour and ambitions, and
those concerned with agreeing on the moral
code to be used to judge these ambitions.
The assembling of evidence would begin
with detailed statistics of personal investment
and consumption trends, the aim
being to find out exactly what living
standards Irish people are preoccupied
with. It would deal not only with spending
on the basic needs of food, clothing and
shelter, but also with the leisure-time
spending in all its forms [including such as
transport] which seems to command such a
large proportion of expenditure in present-day
Ireland, especially among young
people. Such evidence, constantly being
brought up-to-date, would be the raw
materials from which moral judgements
would be produced. Consumption details
as such, however, are not suitable for
immediate judgements, without further
processing designed to bring to the surface
the mentalities which they reflect. Living
needs obviously vary with fashion, the
occupations, and the social status of the
people concerned, so it would be impossible
and mischievous to lay down definite and
detailed regulations indicating the genuineness
of particular consumption tastes. Just
as poverty of spirit is of more significance
than actual poverty, so also the attitude
towards consumption is more important
than the actual consumption patterns.
The nine-point analysis of Irish living
standard ambitions attempted above [p. 285]
would seem to indicate how that attitude
might be isolated for moral appraisals. The
first three factors may be enticing Irish
people to be ambitious about consumption
standards, and the second two may be
showing them how easy it is to enjoy
such standards, but it is the effectiveness of
the convictions referred to in the remaining
four factors which determines the response
to the other factors.
Provided they are accustomed to observing
correct ethical, patriotic, religious and
cultural criteria, the people can be expected
to deal with new consumption ideas in a
satisfactory way. Indeed, this fits in with
the common experience of well-balanced
people leading admirable lives in the midst
of modern-style prosperity; and it is clear
that when responsible people are appalled
by the behaviour of those obsessed with
the pursuit of higher consumption standards,
they are thinking mainly of the
attitude towards ethics, patriotism, religion
and culture reflected in that behaviour. If
that attitude were praiseworthy, we could
expect the consumption ambitions to be
above reproach.
Personal impressions of the varying
mentalities come to mind easily; but they
are likely to be adversely influenced by the
observer's own mentality in those respects.
So an attempt would have to be made to
examine the consumption evidence in a
scientific way for that purpose. Motivation
research techniques, employed so extensively
for commercial purposes by consumer
research organisations, could probably
be adapted usefully for the moral
purpose, while the techniques of social
investigators are also available.
In this way a very reliable picture of the
changing Irish "outlook on life" could be
built up, and it could be kept under
constant review; a once-and-for-all investigation
would soon become dated.
Secondly, there would be the problem_
of having an accepted code of moral
principles in the light of which the factors
actually motivating Irish consumption
attitudes would be appraised. Studies in
moral philosophy and theology provide
the relevant principles, even in relation to
cultural criteria, and those who venture to
influence public opinion would need to be
skilled in interpreting those principles.
Political leaders, in particular, would need
such skill, an obvious fact which, nevertheless,
does not appear to receive sufficient
recognition, in practice.
Already, at least at academic level and
especially through the activities of social
science study groups, considerable knowledge
of such principles prevails in Ireland.
It seems, though, that the growth of such
knowledge in popularity and detail is
being seriously retarded because of a lack
of exercise in interpreting them in the
light of actual Irish circumstances. The
results of the factual investigations suggested
above would provide an incentive
and an opportunity for the further development
of those principles, which consequence
would aid in securing the practical
judgements needed.
The foregoing outline does appear to
offer a workable procedure with which to
commence the examination of the appropriateness
of current Irish consumption
ambitions. A preliminary survey would
indicate the obvious shortcomings in current
attitudes, and provide the starting-point
from which to set about inspiring
enthusiasm for attitudes in accord with the
accepted moral code-in the process the
deficiencies would be displaced in favour
of virtuous habits. The effort would not
consist solely or even mainly of statements
of general moral principles; rather would
it consist of judging the merits of attitudes
revealed in the continuous surveys, and of
simultaneously inspiring respect and enthusiasm
in the most intelligent fashion for
attitudes in accordance with those general
principles.
It remains to consider how such a
positive influence for moral good could be
set in motion with the minimum of delay.
Already the attitudes of the Irish people
have been allowed to develop in response
to world-wide changes in living standards
ideas, without such positive guidance.
Only a scientific investigation could reveal
the defects which have arisen because of
that. Provisionally, it is probably true to
say that the basic instincts are still healthy,
but that undesirable tendencies are gaining
ground. The sooner the positive influence
makes its impact, the sooner will such
tendencies be countered and eradicated,
and the sooner will the Irish potentialities
for happiness be given a better chance to
burst forth vigorously.
Such are the preoccupations of practical
political leaders, and the customary attitude
towards their moral responsibilities
referred to above, that little immediate
action can be expected through their
efforts. Until a mood receptive to such a
political attitude is created among the
Irish people as a whole, political leaders
and their advisers will hardly feel inclined
to exercise their minds with the problem,
and to rearrange their whole political
thinking radically as a consequence. Probably
they are gone beyond the age when
such radical re-arranging of attitudes is
intellectually and emotionally possible, in
any case.
Yet surely they are the people whose
responsibility is greatest in this matter, and
who have the power which is most effective:
their re-education and, maybe, replacement
could be given priority, until eventually
national leaders would play the leading role
in the effort it is their special vocation to
undertake. Indeed it may be that such a
reorientation of political leadership would
be the key to reawakening popular
respect for political pronouncements.
Initially, then, the attempt would have
to originate from a non-Governmental
source, and even after the practical, political
leaders had got accustomed to thinking
along those lines, such a non-Governmental
organ of influence might be necessary as a
permanent leavening force to aid public
opinion. It would hardly be wise to set it
in motion under the sponsorship of the
Catholic Church, even if the Hierarchy
could risk being associated in any way
with the practical judgements of such a
group. The help of political philosophers and
practical investigators, who also happen to be
clergymen, would be advantageous; but the
responsibility for voicing opinions would
rest with people primarily concerned with
temporal rather than supernatural affairs.
It would probably be wise, though, to
confine the initial effort to Catholics, among
whom there is already such a large measure
of agreement on moral principles. While
the viewpoints of non-Catholics could be
entertained in discussions which depend
only on logical thinking, the process of
reconciling conflicting views on basic
principles could be unnecessarily time-consuming,
when one considers the necessity
for, and the valuable benefits which
could follow from, immediate action.
Practical judgements prepared by
Catholics for Catholics could be arranged
relatively quickly, and their publishing
would give non-Catholics an opportunity
to air their views and contribute to the
public opinion which would eventually
take shape.
Irish political thinking probably has
suffered considerably in the past from a
lack of thinking by Catholics for Catholics
in political matters. The anxiety to be
tolerant towards non-Catholic, Irish people
would seem to have resulted in so much
thought being given to the doubts in moral
issues experienced by those non-Catholics,
that insufficient attention has been given to
the more profitable-for Catholics and
non-Catholics alike-work of exploiting
the large measure of certainty in moral
matters it is possible to produce among
Catholics, and from which people of all
religions could benefit. Probably, too,
Irish, Catholic political thinkers are too
anxious to produce opinions which will
meet with the approval of Church authorities,
with the result that they are little
disposed towards taking risks in political
matters, where practical judgements are
always liable to be faulty.
No such inhibitions appear to affect
Catholic political thinkers where Catholics
are in a minority, especially in Continental
countries. Since Irish Catholics, as such, are
a minority group, in the context of the
European situation as a whole, it is all the
more appropriate that they should adjust
themselves to the requirements of that
situation, now that they are becoming
more involved in European affairs.
If the quality of the viewpoints being
issued, through journals and various media
of publicity, were satisfactory, and worthy
of respect, the finances for the work would
be forthcoming. But quality work means
having people with the ability to organise
and interpret social investigations, utilize
moral principles accurately, and explain
the results with journalistic skill. And
people with such a combination of talents
are exceedingly rare in Ireland. The
prominent political philosophers and social
investigators are few in number and are
almost exclusively priests. Laymen and
women who benefit with distinction from
training in such matters are very few; and,
even among those, lack of satisfactory
employment opportunities appears to have
resulted in their not developing their
political thinking for practical purposes.
On the other hand, the journalists who
eventually voice opinions for the benefit of
public opinion usually get training without
the benefit of studies in moral philosophy
and social research. Even the small group
of economists now operating as influential
journalists have no such formal moral
formation and would probably be embarrassed
if they had to outline and justify the
moral code guiding them in their judgements.
Obvious educational reforms are indicated
by that situation, the unsatisfactory
nature of which has been allowed to
develop, because there has been no attempt
at political thinking which would incidentally
highlight its inadequacies and
show the benefits which would be derived
from their being eliminated. The requirements
of the proposed effort would act as a
powerful incentive for such reforms. While
the results of those reforms are being
awaited, the useful practice of importing
trained personnel, with experience in such
work, might be necessary to supplement
the efforts of whatever talent is available in
Ireland already.
CONCLUSION
This essay began as a study of the practical
problems of a policy of consumption
restraint under Irish circumstances, and it
has ended up with suggestions for promoting
the well-being of the Irish people. The
drift of the argument would appear to have
made such an advance from practical
economics to moral philosophy necessary.
The abandoning of the idea of consumption
restraint as reflected in the decision to seek
full membership of the European Economic
Community, was shown to involve
the substitution of a single-purpose national
politico-economic policy for a dual-purpose
one.
In effect, it meant that European-style
consumption standards were considered
necessary for the happiness of the Irish
people, and that the Irish rural and national
population levels should be determined by
the E.E.C.-style free-trade which would
make the realization of those standards
possible. The lack of public discussion
devoted to the significance of that epoch-making
switch in national policy was
noted.
The practical problems associated with a
policy of consumption restraint, for short or
long-term periods, were then examined in
a pragmatic fashion, and it was concluded
that national leaders, though they had not
tried to make the idea of long-term
restraint attractive, were probably right in
concluding that the Irish people did not
want restraint. The "general will" was to
enjoy modern, European consumption
standards, and to deal with the consequences
somehow.
In an attempt to essay a judgement on
the wisdom of that giving-away to the
"general will", it was concluded that
national leaders were right, provided they
were satisfied that the desired consumption
levels were necessary for the well-being of
the Irish people. It was then noted that, in
fact, the very idea of leaders having the
responsibility of making such a judgement
was not generally accepted.
After discussing that anomaly in the
Irish approach to political responsibilities,
a scheme was outlined whereby the practice
of making such moral judgements could be
initiated and exercised continuously in
future, especially by exploiting the large
measure of agreement in matters of
political philosophy found among the
Catholics who form such a large proportion
of the Irish population.
In focussing attention on that issue
alone, this essay would appear to have
value. The practice of making moral
judgements, and of exercising Government
responsibilities accordingly, is one which
should surely have guided Irish political
affairs always. It appears to have been
implied, but never explicitly articulated,
in the policy of consumption restraint,
with its flexible international trading policy,
pursued for the past forty years. But the
half-hearted attention given the issue
appears to have deprived the Irish people
of important benefits for their happiness
which its vigorous and intelligent utilization
could have conferred.
The abandonment of long-term consumption
restraint and the flexible trading policy,
implied in the desire to become a full
member of the European Economic Community,
has served to highlight that
radical defect in Irish political thinking.
The responsibility of ensuring that the
Irish people are guided by praiseworthy
ethical, patriotic, religious, and cultural
criteria in their consumption choices would
obtain in any circumstances. It is particularly
important that it be kept in mind,
when the idea is being mooted that the
management of Irish politico-economic
affairs should be in accord with the regulations
of the E.E.C.
Full membership, with its complete
commitment to E.E.C. ideas, would only
be completely suitable, if those ideas were
in accord with the Irish criteria, that is, if
E.E.C.-style consumption standards were
necessary for the well-being of the Irish
people. There is much to suggest that that
is not entirely the case.
But perfection is something that practical
political leaders cannot hope to arrange.
W e cannot wait indefinitely until E.E.C.
ideas are completely in accord with our
criteria, even if our E.E.C., including
British, trading partners were prepared to
make satisfactory trading conditions available
to us while we waited- a thing they
are unlikely to do. Instead of a gradual
introduction to the idea of our country
being a province in Europe, the transformation
has to take place overnight, as it
were.
Our breathing-space is a short one-but
it still is a breathing-space, during which we
can go a long way, with intensive effort,
towards eliminating whatever defects the
neglect of ethical, patriotic, religious, and
cultural criteria has allowed to develop up
to now. It is not merely a matter of
equipping a minority group to survive in
the face of an inescapable challenge,
instead of being swamped by it. There is
also the fact that having Irish life permeated
with praiseworthy attitudes would be the
best way to enable us Irish to contribute
to the happiness of our fellow human
beings in Europe and in the rest of the
world.
While holding out that prospect of an
Irish future which would do credit to the
traditions which our forefathers fought so
strenuously to preserve, it must be
admitted that the analysis of the current
Irish consumption mentality outlined
earlier in this essay shows that such a
result would have to be achieved in the
face of a strong current going in the
opposite direction. Such is the way -in
which their attitudes have been allowed
to be determined, in the main, the present
generation of Irish people are only too
ready to indulge their tastes in modern
style, regardless of the moral consequences-
which could be devastating-for
themselves, the Irish nation and the world.
Statesmanlike thinking, eloquence and
practical ingenuity would be necessary to
change their attitudes, and pave the way for
the full flowering of Irish talents. But their
obligations would appear to leave Irish
political leaders with little alternative to
tackling such a task: and the probable
fruits of such successful action are delightful
to contemplate. It could be a wonderful
opportunity for the new generation of Irish
statesmen to show their mettle.
