If you let a man without sense or sensibility loose among the cisalpine progeny of that
prolific verb sentire, it is unknown in what bog-hole his remains will be preserved for
posterity. It is a long way back to that verbose old gentleman, Cicero, whither the
etymologist would take us as a mere down-the-block stroll on his way back to real origins.
But, in our effort to define our terms of reference, etymology is not of much use to us,
though it may be an interesting occupation for some who, perhaps, would be hard put to
it to earn an honest living otherwise.
The offspring have developed so far from their ancestor that genealogy is not much
use to us, though your man, Cicero, confines his sententiae to the universe of "thought"
rather than "expression", which confirms us in our use of the word "sentiments" above - note
plural. Of course, we could have much fun with a game called "Semantics"; but,
after all, what really concerns us is the "sense of the word as in its use to- day in good
writing", and not in Pope's use or in Shakespeare's, though admittedly a grasp of the line
of development, or change, may confirm our understanding of to- day's use and meaning.
Incidentally, in reverse, it can blow sky-high the claim to veracity of a biographer who
puts into the mouth of his hero, as a quotation, a word which did not exist, or which had
a different meaning, in contemporary use.
So, to our cue-words, "Sentiment" and
"Sentimentality". No! I am not going to
quote pedantically from the New English
Dictionary (popularly called the "Oxford"
-ironically?). In such a case as this, it is
as good as any other lexicon at "giving
with the right hand and taking away with
the left", so that, when one has coru1ed
all the various usages of a word in the
living language, he is seldom left with a
firm and well-defined single sense which is
"fool-proof", because the language is
living and changing as all living things
are, and because dictionaries are not built
for fools. But, there is one criterion which
we can derive from the various usages
mentioned in our lexicon, and this, I think,
serves to distinguish for us between
"sentiment" and "sentimentality". It is
this, that "sentiment is a mental attitude,
feeling, emotion", that it is "now applied
to feelings which involve an intellectual
element, or are concerned with ideal
objects", that it is "an emotional thought
expressed in Literature or Art." In fine,
it belongs to the mind; and "sentimentality"
is anything but a feeling belonging to the
mind, for it is "an affectation of sensibility",
"an exaggerated insistence upon the claims
of feeling". May we be pardoned for
using slang terms which, however, define
"sentimentality" for us-" gush", "mush",
"slush"? Assuredly, not of the intellect!
It is noteworthy that the N.E.D. gives
as one of the usages of the word "sentiment"
the description of "an emotional
thought expressed in Literature and Art",
though there is no need for the two words,
as Literature is Art, but it does "put paid"
to the attitude of the hirsute adolescents
of the literary fringe who feign to shudder
at the mention of "emotion" or "sentiment''
in connection with Literature.
Moreover, it re-defines our basic definition,
if one may "define" such things, that "Art
is the expression of emotion controlled
by the intellect".
In Literature, as the never-still pendulum
of artistic endeavour swings through the
half-arc of Feeling, on the one side, and of
Expression, on the other; through the
Romantic, on the one, and the Classical,
on the other; through the "Emotion
recollected in tranquillity" of Wordsworth
and the ''What oft was thought but ne'er
so well expressed" of Pope; the extreme
on the one side is mere Sentimentality
uncontrolled, and on the other is the
Worship of Form, the apotheosis of
Craftmanship. The perfection of Balance,
where the pendulum attains its maximum
speed, is, at the highest valuation, unattainable;
though, at a lower, it may
admit of one writer in the whole history
of a Literature.
Now, if we have established the real
difference between Sentiment and Sentimentality,
we must premise that the judge
of the application of these criteria be
"Saint Thomas' s average man" whose
prime characteristic is sincerity, for the
gloss on "insincerity" is surely "living a
lie", and the Lie is anathema in the domain
of the aesthetic, as in the domain of the
moral. This excludes the small band of
self-elected super-sophisticates on the one
hand, who assume the "fashion" of being
"out of the fashion" -no reference is
intended to a group of ladies who arrogate
unto themselves a high-sounding title of
enigmatic implications; on the other, it
excludes the "illiterate", that is, "those who
are incompetent to judge works of literary
value through lack of education in appreciation".
This is, of course, valid in the
domain of Art as a whole, for none would
expect valid musical judgement from the
stricken earwigs who, anaesthetised by the
strident cacophany of drivelling sentimentality,
wriggle for hours in incredible
contortions to the satiric amusement of the
sophisticated onlooker who, unhampered
by the "dope" of noise, can see them as
they cannot see themselves. And, with
regard to the phrase "education in appreciation",
above, we are not referring to the
conventional formulae trotted out in the
schools, and required as succinct answers to
examination questions, for he who believes
that his "education" is complete with the
acquiring a certificate to the effect that he is
formula-wise stands in grave danger indeed,
for "education" is a continuing process
which really begins when the tutorial hand
is removed.
In plain words, he only is a judge of a
good book who reads good books; of a
good play, who sees, or hears, good plays;
of good poetry; who reads, or hears, good
poetry; his school-days are valuable only in
so far as they may have made him free of
the "good" which has stood the test of
time, and from which his formulae have
been derived.
Now, with a grasp of the difference
between ''Sentiment and Sentimentality'',
and an understanding of the class of folk
who may be trusted to make that distinction
correctly, we should note that not all
"Sentiment" belongs to the domain of Art.
One might express, in a ''Letter to the
Editor", a Sentiment of Moral Indignation
at the rather shocking (literal meaning)
Newspaper and Radio cover of one of the
most unsavoury incidents of modern
English History-I do not refer to the
reign of the saintly Henry VI !-which
received as much publicity (and ghoulish
detail) as the sacrificial agony of the late
Holy Father. There was, too, until recently,
a strong Patriotic Sentiment in this country,
which was not necessarily of the domain
of the Aesthetic, and which, in truth, gave
rise to writing that oozed "Sentimentality",
even though its sincerity in its own domain
is unquestionable.
While what we have said of the Moral
and the Patriotic holds good for other
Emotions, we have dealt extensively with
them because it is they which crop up
most frequently in assessing the poetic
content of Anglo-Irish verse, and with
most likelihood of confusion. "Love",
also, may be an inspiration of poetry, real
or seeming, though less frequently in this
limited field than one might expect, which
Alphonse Daudet might attribute to "lack
of sun". To connect Patriotism with the
Moral may seem to the superficial view
far-fetched; but this is not so, for love
of the patria is merely an extension of
the love of Family, which is enjoined on
us, and surely the pigeon-hole into which
the Fourth Commandment fits is labelled
pietas. But the single-word Latin equivalent
of Patriotism is pietas, and Livy defines it as
in patrem patriamque, which could not be
clearer.
In modern times, some theologians have
arrogated unto themselves, almost completely,
the use of this word, particularly
in its English form of "piety", in the
restricted sense of the "honour and respect
due from Man to God, and the outward
manifestations of the feeling". But, how
absolutely the mot Juste it is in the lines
which Wordsworth prefixed to the Ode,
Intimations of Immortality from Recollections
of Early Childhood!
The Child is father of the Man;
And I could wish my days to be
Bound each to each by natural piety.
A Moral "Sentiment" in any theology, and
a contribution to Literature!
With regard to the "Sentiment" of
Patriotism, our premiss, that it is an
extension of Love of Family, implies
categorically that it is a love of People,
rather than of Place or material earth.
But what of the Exile's "ould sod" and
Kathleen Ni Houlihan's "Four Green
Fields"? I fear that the same Exile would
soon get bored if he were treading the
"ould sod" with nobody else about; if he
were of the first generation of exiles, he
might for a short time nostalgically
"people" the place with memories, but
soon he would be passing the Statue of
Liberty, west-bound, or leaving a plane
at Idlewild, if he could afford it! And
Kathleen's "Four Green Fields" is merely
a metaphorical garb for the Undivided
Nation; it is the Rape of the Fields that
causes the tears to flow, that is the wrong
done to the Owners by their dispossession
and the hardships therefrom.
Incidentally, the anger aroused by the
paraphernalia of the "Stage Irishman",
on and off stage, is not a "patriotic"
emotion, much less "Sentiment". It is
merely hurt pride at not being rated the
same as the "Bulls" and the "Sams" in
trivialities that do not matter against the
eternal background, or even the historical
one. It is surely pitiable that this "individualistic"
people (or some of them) should be
driven into "the mob" by the malicious
buffoonery of an inferior people, defensively
pretending to a superiority complex.
We were not alone, of course, for the
oppressor always hates his unyielding
victim, and as much "fun" was made of
Mahatma Gandhi's loin-cloth and his goat
as of the Gael's homespun-trousers and his
pig, while the inadequate kilt of the
co-operating Scotsman is regarded as a
badge of Honour, even in the House of
Lords !-Perhaps it is because Englishmen
love to show their "Garters" even on the
most solemn occasions?
But, it may be that these externals have
been more important than we rate them,
for the constant reiteration of the jibes
misled the less-intelligent into an acceptance
of their inferiority, and some, quisling-like,
to join in raucous chorus with the
traducers of the Race; so that, in our
generation, the gun had to be drawn to
convince the enemy within, as well as
the enemy without, that this Nation was
on the march. Paradoxically, the Christ-like
philosopher of India, following the
teaching of Terence MacSwiney, that "It
is not those who can inflict the most, but
to those who can suffer the most that the
victory is assured" , could march barehanded
to the ultimate victory; perhaps it
was because there were less "Playboys of
the Eastern World" to hamper the advance?
We crave pardon for the "deviationism",
but the tourist-minded reader (percentage?)
will concede that not all the scenery is
visible from the main road!
And, if in wandering down the bohereen,
we stubbed our toe on the hard fact, that
not all of the lingering odour of "Stage-Irishism"
was "made in England", but that
Irish "skunks" were ready to co-operate
in polluting the Literary atmosphere, we
should have learnt something about ourselves,
which is profitable schooling. But
let me hasten to intervene, lest any imagine
that I was bestowing a "directorship" of
the "scent factory" on James Millington
Synge by parodying the title of a play. Not
at all! The furore we made half-a-lifetime-ago
was due to our uneducated belief that
every unflattering portrait in a literary
work must be a trick-photograph of the
"Average Irishman", while the flattering
ones were "just the dead spit of him"!
To this we shall have to return later.
But, that word "uneducated", above,
implies something to which we have
already referred-"education" towards the
practice, or even appreciation, of an Art.
It is true that folk often say "Poets are
born, not made"; but do they really mean
what they say? Do they realise that they
are preaching "Predestination" in this life,
at least? To push that view to its logical
conclusion would be to reach a reductio
ad absurdum. The truth is that the child
("the Father of the Man") is endowed with
certain qualities, (Gaelic, "bua"), or
"talents" (Milton's "That one talent which
is death to hide"), which, if cultivated in the
right climate, will give you your Poet,
Novelist, Dramatist, Painter, Sculptor,
Hurler, Footballer, or what you will. In
this connexion, the supercilious distinction
between “talent” and “genius” could not be
farther from mind; besides which, we are
using the word, not as the label of a
“result”, but as a “factor”, an “ingredient",
with the Parable in the foreground,
as with Milton.
"Talents cultivated in the right climate"
-every word important, though not
always of equal weight; but each one
pointing in the direction of "the family,"
of "heredity". This does not mean, of
course, that Poet Fathers necessarily have
Poet Sons, nor that Poet Sons have Poet
Fathers (except in Wordsworth's figurative
relationship); but, lacking the pre-disposing
causes, the "Talents" are most unlikely to
flower. Gray, gazing at the crumbling
mounds of the "Country Churchyard",
mused,
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial
fire;
Hands, that the rod of empire might have
swayed,
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre.
But knowledge to their eyes her ample page
Rich with the spoils of time did ne'er
unroll;
Chill Penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Some village Hampden, that with dauntless
breast,
The little tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest,
Some Cromwell guiltless of his country's
blood.
As in the case of the "Makers" in the
world of the Artistic, so it is with those
who would understand, appreciate, love
the Artistic in its various forms of expression,
though on a lower level of intensity.
For this, there must be a basic "climate"
(or "environment") in which the "cultivation” 
of a “taste” for, or knowledge of,
the particular medium may be possible.
The hoi polloi turns its back on "classical"
Music because it mistakenly assumes that
a technical acquaintance with instruments
is necessary to its enjoyment; and, so,
Music, with a capital "M", is protected
by a sort of "chevaux de frise" of keys,
ivory, silver and brass, and by arrowy overtones
shot from the horse-hair strings of
varied bows. But, in fact, the musik-kenner
needs not the instrumental skill
of the player; his appreciation grows from
a familiarisation with the Good, translated
for him into sound by the skill of others.
Painting and Sculpture, too, are set apart
from the understanding of the masses,
because of lack of "education"; they would
demand of these two Arts mere photography
in two, or three dimensions; but
they are debarred from invading by the
skills of the brush, the palette, the trowel,
the chisel, the mallet, and by the blending
of paint and the texture of stone. But
Literature in the vernacular! That is their
very own! Do they not speak the language?
Can they not read the newspapers? Can they
not sign their names on the back, or even
the front, of a cheque? Does one not hear,
as a symbol of culture in this country,
"He speaks French like a Frenchman"?
Whereas, the less-exaggerated statement,
that "He knows far more of French
literature and culture than eighty per cent.
of Frenchmen, but is a bad speaker of the
language", would seem incredible.
Yes! It is this attitude that leaves us at
the mercy of purveyors of ''Songs for the
Millions", in any vernacular. It is unregarded,
unrealised, that the "cultivation"
of taste in literature is necessary to those
who would distinguish the chaff from the
wheat, and that this nous is achieved
only by long association with the Good, as
it has been hall-marked by the generations
of Saint Thomas's average man. There are
those who, foolishly, believe that this is
the work of the Schools! There are parents
who, having zealously tended "the business"
from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. and having paid
the school-fees of young Sean and his
brothers and sisters out of the profits of
their undoubted industry, feel that the rest
of the evening is their own to spend
playing Golf, or Cards, or relaxing in the
Cinema. Young Sean is safely occupied
at home with a large assignment of "homework",
or snugly tucked away in a
"boarding-school" where it is the business
of somebody else to look after him!
Example? What better could he get than
from his parents who do all the right
things in a Christian community? Education?
Are they not paying well for it?
Leave it to the experts!
And what do they expect of the
"experts", of the schools? They expect
young Sean to be trained to win the usual
"certificates" -the proud ones demand
"Honours" -which will enable him to
land a better job than his father's (that is a
"ten-to-five" one), or which will give
him standing among his fellow club-members
when he joins papa in the family
business-he will be the one called upon
to make up "the score" at the end of the
evening since he "got Honours Maths in
the Leaving Certificate"! They do not
believe, with Aristotle and his saintly
disciple, that "Education is a training for
leisure", and that the "home-work" is
done in the family leisure-time, and that
it is his parents who create the "climate"
in which young Sean's "talents" may be
"cultivated".
The word "leisure" becomes a mockery
when used in the context of the race for
results at examinations. What can the
schools do? In the eyes of the parents of the
country, the justification for their existence
is to be found in these "results", though
some parents are happy with the son's
Football Medals-he is "going into the
business" in any case! Now, the way the
schools go at this is to reduce everything
to a Formula; that is why such good
"results" are gained in Mathematical subjects-
they are just "horrid" with formulae
(pardon the pun!). Maybe you may
remember that, a few hundred lines ago,
we referred to "Those who would understand,
appreciate, love the Artistic"? Well,
here is young Sean's chance to show his
mettle; he has been asked to write an
"Appreciation" of a certain poem by one,
William Shakespeare. If he gets only the
first line, he will quote the lot, just to
show that he deserves nearly half of the
marks anyway; if it has Fourteen lines (as
like as not, since there are no others of his
poems on the course, except a few obvious
"Songs") it is a "Sonnet"; the rime-scheme
is etc., etc. It reminds me, God save us!
of a butcher wading into the carcass of a
sheep. When he has finished, what have
you? Not a sheep, but mutton-customers'
dinners! And when Sean has finished with
that Sonnet, what have you? Not a poem,
but the answer to an examination question
-marks on a "Results" sheet! And Sean
and the Butcher had equal chances of
laying hands on what made his victim live
before it was brought in for the post-mortem treatment.
Yet, the Butcher had left his mutton,
and Sean his memory of the lines; food for
the body and for the mind, when properly
digested and absorbed. And, when Sean
has forgotten the technique of dissection,
and the coveted Certificate is collecting
dust in some forgotten corner of a cupboard,
he may remember "Three April
perfumes in three hot Junes burned" as
another way of referring to the lapse of
three years-and be the better for it-if he
has "leisure" and the will to use it profitably.
But he will soon forget that nonsense
if he has only "free time" from "the
business" to thrash a pale and inoffensive
sphere through a maze of greenery, and at
night to "deceive" his watchful companions
by wishing for three digging-implements
when he is striving to snatch four percussion-instruments
with which to beat them playfully.
But, if, perchance, he is celebrating
the winning of "The Captain's Prize'',
maybe at a famous Western resort, Sean
will drool of the exile's longing to stand
just where he has achieved his victory. And,
with closed eyes (to restrain the oozing
tears, perhaps?), this "Pillar of the Church",
this exemplary lay-theologian, will "ask
his God to let him make his heaven in that
land beyond the Irish say" -all with the
utmost solemnity, for arrant "Sentimentality"
is always solemn! What visions it
conjures up of the "Eternal Reward"!
Our Sean, the un-exiled exile, "Watching
the saint-ly women digging stellar praties
on the celestial uplands'', and hearing their
eternal prattle in "a language that the
English (in-Tourist-version, 'strangers') do
not know", while the "bare-foot Angels
(celestial in-Tourist-version of 'garsoons')
play" -at "hunt the feather”, maybe as
"slippers" would be unknown to the
Gaeltacht Angels and pampooties have not
exactly the "odour of sanctity" !
The ecstatic light on Sean's countenance,
coming from within (perish that cynical
thought!), is a sure indication that the
crowning glory of his "heaven" would be
"To watch the sun go down on
Galway Bay"!
But why does the light fade so quickly?
Could it be that a cloud from the mist-shrouded
Aran Islands has blown across
the sun? Impossible! They would be perpetually
visible, as a demarcation-line
between "Heaven" and the "lost" continents
outside. No! It is that a niggling
doubt has grown in Sean's mind about it
all. Had he not sung, earlier, a line upon
which it all depended:
"And, if there's going to be a life
hereafter,''
"If", mind you! . . . IF!
Against which, of course, we have the
author's "assurance" that he "feels" that
"there's bound to be" !
The only suitable comment is "Poppycock",
or an equivalent!
One wonders if Sean had remembered
the notorious "dissection" technique and
the "Good" things subjected to it, would
he have sung that insincere composition
with a different expression-amused, perhaps
mocking, even cynical as he looked
round upon the bemused faces of the
vociferous chorus? Would he have sung
something else, despite the demand? Or
would he just have walked home to find
aesthetic salvation in his own back-room,
in an old school-text of his arch-enemy of
the plays? Perhaps in that majestic march
to world's-end and the brink of eternity:
And) like the baseless fabric of this vision)
The cloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous
Palaces,
The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
Leave not a wrack behind.
An unfair comparison, you may say
with a popular song? True, but Sean
requires a great shock to bring him to his
"senses". Indeed, if he were less comatose,
he might be re-oriented by a companion's
singing of a contemporary composition
which has more truth-to-life and sincerity
than all the drooling sentimentality of this
age of "juvenile delinquency" and "teenage
tantrums", to wit :
The ould triangle
Goes jingle-jangle,
Along the waters
Of the Royal Canal.
Of course, the "popular" song has not
been chosen for purposes of Literary
comparison, but because it is "popular"
and, therefore, indicative of the state of
general taste which, in this case, shows a
definite "low". Undoubtedly, there are
far worse than our choice being "talked"
all day and every day through diaphragms,
whether of radio or microphone; but, the
most insidious is always that which gives
to the general level "a local habitation and
a name", and a catchy tune. We know that
it is the herd instinct that creates the
climate for the truly foreign importations,
and we can hope that some who are "in"
the herd may not really be "of" it, and
are possibly educable. But the "localised"
variety can trap the unwary who, in
admiring the "scenery", overlook the
philosophy.
The reaction against "Sentimentality" is
"The Cynical"; the Sentimental is a
shirking of, an escape from, a deliberate
shying away from Reality; Cynicism is a
"jaundiced view of Reality", often engendered
by its opposite, and its philosophy
is the philosophy of defeat", too often "of
despair". If Sentimentality can be said to
have a "philosophy", at any time, it will
be a too facile optimism, one may say "presumption".
One is inclined to shy away
from "Tears" in literary compositions. as
being sentimental, particularly if there are
"Smiles" around the corner, but the
"spectroscopic" test is not always reliable,
for there are tears and tears. Here are
some which indicate a blank despair,
though one would hesitate to think of
cynicism in this connexion. They are those
of "The Irish Mother in the Penal Days",
as portrayed by John Banim... It is somewhat
"literary" in language, as was the custom
of those days when the "classical" idiom
still held sway in Ireland (in the eighteen-twenties),
as it did for long after, but the
sincerity would appear in any garb.
Now welcome, welcome, baby-boy, unto a
mother's fears,
The pleasure of her sufferings, the rainbow
of her tears,
The object of your father's hope, in all he
hopes to do,
A future man of his own land, to live him
o'er anew!
How fondly on thy little brow a mother's
eye would trace,
And in thy little limbs, in each feature of
thy face,
His beauty, worth and manliness, and
everything that's his
Except, my boy, the answering mark of
where the fetter is!
Oh! many a weary hundred years his sires
that fetter wore,
And he has worn it since the day that him
his mother bore;
And, now, my son, it waits on you, the
moment you were born,
The old hereditary badge of suffering and
scorn!
Alas, my boy so beautiful!-alas, my love so
brave!
And must your gallant Irish limbs still drag
it to the grave?
And, you, my son, yet have a son,
foredoomed a slave to be,
Whose mother still must weep o'er him the
tears I weep o'er thee!
It is true that Tommy Moore's "Rainbow"
is there, but the "Tears" are not the tears
of his "Sarah Curran", who is quite an
artificial conception beside Banim's "Irish
Mother". Perhaps I should have said
"Sentimental conception" straight away?
Oh, yes! The romantic figure of this
pining girl is the sentimental conception
of Moore, as romantic figures of pining
girls have been the sentimental conceptions
of other poets down the centuries.
That the real facts of their lives have belied
the poet's story is not the point at all, though
it does not help to establish the "sincerity"
of the conception, which is based on
"truth to life" -not necessarily to a particular
life. However, Moore's "Legend"
will undoubtedly live as long as folk sing
sentimental songs; and her story will
draw touring pilgrims to the town of
Newmarket, Co. Cork, where her "hard-hearted"
but brilliant father was born
almost sixty years before her mortal
remains returned to its churchyard. Here,
under a plain stone-not contemporary - simply
inscribed “Sarah Curran”, lies
the dust of the wife of the English
Captain Sturgeon who, as she made known
to her friends, the Penroses, made her
happy for the last three years of her life.
It might be thought that Washington
Irving contributed to the perpetuation of
the Legend of Sarah with his essay, "The
Broken Heart" ; but I do not think that he
ever had much of a public in this country!
I know of two, since my copy is missing!
Moreover, it is the uncritical who keep
the "fairy stories" going.
I am about to take a daring step now,
and many will disagree with me entirely.
I suggest that Thomas Moore "made"
Robert Emmet, in the sense that Boswell
is said to have "made" Johnson. It is one
of the Ironies of History that the romanticised
figure should out-top in stature, in
the public mind, the careful, thorough,
soldierly "organisers of victory" (successful,
or not). The thinking young men of
the "1916" generation read Tone's "Autobiography"
and studied his methods, but
the "party pieces" kept the romantic
Robert Emmet and his Sarah well to the
fore in the public esteem! No songs about
Tone who left little to chance, except that
one chance by which the Grim Fate of
Ireland won the game, with the disgraceful
help of bare-faced Irish Treachery. History
says that, had the French kept their word
as to Time and Place and Force, the country
would have been in the hands of the
United Irishmen, with their excellent
organisation, with.in a week. The other
chance the United Men had to take was
that Christian Irishmen, who had sworn
oaths before their God, would not sell
their friends for pieces of silver.
These were no Sentimentalists; no
inspirers of sobs and songs! And when an
occasional ballad does eventuate from the
actions of these, the true precursors of the
almost-successful men of 1916 et seq., it
has no room for Sentimentality, it is more
like the grimly realistic ballad of earlier
vintage.
Now, without wishing to be cruel, it
must be said that Military History sees the
1803 adventure as the most hare-brained
escapade in the long story of revolt and
repression. There was no real promise of
aid from outside, there was no real organisation
at home-there was not even a tie-in
with Michael Dwyer who had been
fighting successfully for the last five
years! When Emmet and his Hundred
Men marched on Dublin Castle, they were
not beaten by the English, but by the mob
which took over, scenting loot and plunder.
Even when he fled from the scene, Emmet
made no attempt to save his life, but flung
it away in an effort to have a meeting with
his beloved Sarah Curran; if that life were
of value to his country, for leadership, this
was indeed criminal. It also embroiled her
father, the greatest lawyer of his time, who
had defended every one of the '98 Leaders
and whom the Government would dearly
like to fling into prison. Little wonder that
he refused the defence of Emmet!
But he had youth and a romantic love-story-
and a friend who could make songs!
Who could write
When he who adores thee has left but the
name
Of his fault and his sorrows behind,
Oh! Say wilt thou weep, when they
darken the fame
Of a life that for thee was resigned? etc.
which is as fine a poetic paraphrase of
Emmet's "Speech from the Dock" as one
could desire. But that rhetorical Apologia
pro Vita Sua has been buried beneath, dust
for generations, while for a century-and-a-half
the unimpeachable motives of Emmet
have been kept before the public through
the rendering of Moore's attractive song
by countless fruity baritones. His utter
ineptitude for the task which he took upon
himself has been buried with full musical
honours!
But it was an adolescent effort, which is
probably why the air of youthfulness hangs
about this adventure in Love and in War of
a man in his twenty-sixth year, to whom
many men still serving their country, or
sleeping in the Republican Plots throughout
the land, could give Ten good years
when they first answered the call to arms
during our own "Five Glorious Years",
as they have been euphemistically styled.
Moore knew the value of "youth" as a
master-key to the hearts of "the people",
and to the benediction of their tears,
which guarantee "Immortality":
But the night-dew that falls, though in
silence it weeps,
Shall brighten with verdure the grave
where he sleeps,
And the tear that we shed, though in
secret it rolls,
Shall long keep his memory green in our
souls.
Norman Reddin, in "The Three Flowers",
repeats the note:
Its name is Robert Emmet,
It's the youngest flower of all,
And I'll keep it fresh, beside my breast
Though all the world should fall.
There are ballads to "Young Roddy
McCorley" and "Kevin Barry", and with
good reason; but the only "Requiem" to
Tom Clarke was the echo round the walls
of Kilmainham of the Lee-Enfield volley
which ended the forty years of penal
servitude to the cause of Kathleen Ni
Houlihan who, apparently, had no tears for
the withered warrior of the unbroken
spirit, who was, in truth, no more than
fifty-nine years old!
But, Patriotic sentimentality has served
a purpose in Ireland, as it was for long
the only "clue" linking the generations
which were deliberately deprived of education;
and, abandoning their native tongue,
were left without standards of comparison
between the good and the bad. I think
that there is no sentimentality in the Gaelic
writing, nor is there in the English verse
written by those who were based in the
Gaelic, apart even from "translations".
In the Gaelic, too, besides "tales of wonder
and imagination", were circulated hard
realistic stories of the individuals and small
groups who never bowed to the conqueror-
the kind of men who later fought
a guerilla war of attrition with the then
greatest empire the world had seen until
she had to call a halt in 1921. Such a grim
series of individual actions, even when
planned to a pattern, does not provide
inspiration for ballad or song, except in
some rare and striking case such as the
action at Kilmichael, and even then the
verses are made on the pattern of an older
song.
The various types of metrics found in
the Gaelic are, indeed, involved enough;
but, being indigenous, they do not necessarily
inhibit "sincerity"-whatever about
great poetry! But when imported into
English, these exotic exercises have
generally the catastrophic effect of a new
toy upon the concentration of a child! J. J.
Callanan, Edward Walsh, John Banim
and Carleton can, in translation and free
composition, reproduce the Gaelic assonantal
systems without looking like conjurors
pulling rabbits out of hats! But,
once you let Moore loose on his hobby of
weaving intricate metrical patterns, ringing
the changes on chiming rimes, and juggling
dexterously with metaphors and similes,
you may get a Bach "Exercise for the
Piano", you will not get Poetry.
Even Robert Emmet's own sincere, if
unpoetical, "Lines on the Burying Ground
of Arbour Hill" are falsified by the tour-deforce
of the last stanza:
But here the patriot's tears are shed,
The poor man's blessing given;
These consecrate the virtuous dead,
These waft their fame to heaven.
Limping after College friend Moore! '"Tis
true 'tis pity, and pity 'tis 'tis true!"
Listen to the Beethoven- like quality of
this:
How sweet the answer Echo makes
To music at night,
When roused, by lute or horn, she wakes,
And far away, o'er lawns and lakes
Goes answering light!
And counterpoint:
Yet Love hath echoes truer far,
And far more sweet,
Than e'er beneath the moonlight's star,
Of horn, or lute, or soft guitar,
The songs repeat.
But now:
'Tis when the sigh in youth sincere – 
And only then-
The sigh that's breath'd for one to hear
Is by that one, that only dear,
Breath'd back again!
Foxed you! Listen to that schoolgirl giggle!
Fair comment is "too clever by half!"
Great poetry is not achieved by "three-card-
trickery"!
Not that it is intended to denigrate
Moore in all his works, but only in his
"pomps"; to chastise him when he confuses
Sentiment with Sentimentality; when he
lacks "Sincerity", that "High Seriousness"
of which Matthew Arnold speaks. It is
surprising to recall that he belonged to
the generation of Wordsworth and Coleridge,
the "Romantics"; he might have
lived in another world! He was a friend
and admirer of Byron, who was certainly
not poetically impeccable, but who had a
Power beyond Moore's reach, and a
Passion which might have been saved from
"Rant" if it had been "recollected in
tranquillity''.
Perhaps if we use the milder word
"Rhetoric", we can see how many of our
Songs and Ballads fall under this epithet.
The Fontenoy of the gentle Davis and The
Memory of the Dead jump to the mind at
once; but, for me, the much-lauded My
Dark Rosaleen of Mangan carries the same
taint, as do others of his poems. As we said
at first, Patriotism is not necessarily a
Sentiment on the aesthetic plane, though
it can be, as when Yeats, with poetic
vision, saw that, the common places of
life being sublimated by unselfish Love of
Country,
"A terrible beauty is born".
Now, while Patriotic Sentimentality
may be bad poetry, it may be quite
tolerable in song, if well intended, that is
if meant to arouse patriotic Sentiment.
Amorous Sentimentality can arouse nothing
but wrath. The International variety, to
which we have opened our ears-and our
mouths-since we have grown ashamed
of our "Irishness", is outside the competence
of Sanity to comment upon. Suffice
it to say that, when it is given "a local
habitation and a name" in Ireland, Lough
Neagh becomes an added attraction to
Killarney, and Dublin a sweet rustic parish
on the shores of Galway Bay!
“Acht, fágaimís siúd mar atá siad!”
The most of the compositions on the
theme of Human Love, which come within
our terms of reference, are either Light
and Flippant-not excluding Moore !-or
blatantly Sentimental; in both cases, it is
inhibited by self-consciousness, for it is
only the Poet who has the Courage to
reveal his real mind and heart, and Poets
are so few! There is, of course, great Love
Poetry, but that is the theme of a different
inquiry. In the Anglo-Irish, though not in
the Gaelic, there was also that long tradition
of artificial "Courtly" Love, which came
down from ''days of old, when knights
were bold", and it was de rigeur for every
knight to have a Lady at whose feet he
might lay the guerdon, won in public, or
in private, encounter. That is the background
to all the namby-pamby riming
turned out by adolescents of any age;
and, despite its oaths of fealty, it is what
stockbrokers would call a "Transferable
Bond". This shies away from Passion which
is, indeed, a constituent of Love, though
the part does not include the whole. To
which one might call an infinitude of
witness, between Poets and Psychologists.
For the present, we shall confine ourselves
to the most succinct statement of
the case which comes to n1.ind; it is the
neat metaphor of John Boyle O'Reilly,
entitled:
A white rose
The red rose whispers of passion,
And the white rose breathes of love;
Oh, the red rose is a falcon,
And the white rose is a dove.
But I send you a cream-white rosebud
With a flush on its petal tips;
For the love that is purest and sweetest
Has a kiss of desire on the lips.
Driven by restriction of time and space to
select, perhaps, one example of serious
thought upon the theme which would not
excite the laughter of fools, one was
startled into gratitude for the inspiration of
the phrase, for Despite Fools' Laughter is
B. G. MacCarthy's selection from the
lyric writings of Terence MacSwiney, that
man "who walked with God" in life and
death, and here was reward enough:
The Moment
I know not if I spoke, or whether speech
Did frame itself at all to utterance;
I saw the colour of thy brow advance,
And then half shyly thou didst dare to reach
Thy lips where mine could fully bend to teach
The truth that first unfolded in a glance.
God's name be praised! It was no happy
chance;
His guiding hand did draw us each to each.
Then all the world did seem to hush in awe;
Its every voice was stilled) and silence blessed
The consummation of God's grand design.
My soul felt then Truth did her veil
Withdraw,
While sweet solemnity stole in my breast,
A promise and a warning to combine.
To which there stands as pendent picture,
the Renunciation of Padraig Pearse with
whom, to his anguish, MacSwiney was not
allowed to fight and die, so that, by the
inscrutable way of Providence, he and his
County might be preserved for the long
agony and the dogged fight which complemented
Dublin's glorious "1916", to
place within our grasp in 1921 the full
fruit of war and sacrifice.
Let us, but for a moment, glance at
Religious Sentiment in verse, a dangerous
subject, I grant you, in a country "where
all the Saints are Heroes and all the Heroes,
Saints"; where England still stirs the broth
of bigotry even though less vigorously
than of yore, and still maintains a politicoreligious
division for her own benefit; so
that the "Witch-hunt of Salem" may be
emulated by the "Pogrom of Belfast";
where the pharisaical ranting of the Pietistic
few is more vociferous than the hum-drum
Piety of the many.
When religious persecution failed and
force gradually disappeared, the two views
of Christianity were left facing each other in
a spirit of rivalry, and in a state of approximate
balance-power and prestige, on the
one side, equating with numbers and
stamina, on the other-an uneasy self-consciousness
supervened. Now, self-consciousness
is inimical to Literary Sincerity,
and, so, we find little Religious
Poetry in modern times except in translations
from earlier Gaelic, or from the
pens of Gaelic-minded writers. As we
have mentioned this in another connexion
also, perhaps we should explain that we
are not so naive as to attribute the virtue
of sincerity only to the Gaelic language
per se.
No! Listen to Wordsworth who, though
not always right, is right here. Of the
subjects of his own poetry he says: "Humble
and rustic life was generally chosen, because,
in that condition, the essential passions of
the heart find a better soil in which they
can attain their maturity, are less under
restraint, and speak a plainer and more
emphatic language ... and because, in that
condition, the Passions of men are incorporated
with the beautiful and permanent
forms of nature." And the men from whom
we have received un-sentimental verse - patriotic,
amorous, or religious-were
peasant-minded because of their origins a
century ago; and, in the last half-century,
because the cult of the language, which
they all loved, was the cult of living on the
poor lands of the Atlantic sea-board and
its hinterlands.
Against the background of their vision,
the patron hero-saints of Orange and of
Green are equally "stage-Irish": William
of the White Horse, "the great Zorobabel";
and Patrick of the Shamrock, with "the
tear and the smile in his eye" ! And how
their Feast-days are celebrated! When the
Orange Lodges march in Belfast, and the
"dervishes" fight the "Boyne" again on
the "battle-field" of Finaghy ! When the
multi-racial "Irish" march through Times
Square and the Empire State Building, that
modern "Tower of Babel", is crowned
with Shamrock! And are not their
"Anthems" equally Sentimental? That
Hymn of hate, "The Boyne Water"? And
that English view of what is "typically
Irish", "Hail Glorious Saint Patrick"?
Set against all these Sentimentalities
Pearse's The Mother, in which meet Patriotism,
Mother Love, true Christian Resignation
in the face of Sacrifice, all irradiated
by the piety of the author from whose
mind the Eternal Son and His Mother were
never absent. Can one doubt that the
inspiration here was the vision of Mary at
the Foot of the Cross, with Her Motherlove,
Her Love of Mankind and Her
Resignation?
I do not grudge them; Lord, I do not grudge
My two strong sons that I have seen go out
To break their strength and die, they and
a few,
In bloody protest for a glorious thing,
They shall be spoken of among their people,
The generations shall remember them,
And call them blessed.
But I will speak their names to my own
heart
In the long nights;
The little names that were familiar once
Round my dead hearth.
Lord, Thou art hard on mothers;
We suffer in their coming and their going;
And though I grudge them not, I weary,
weary
Of the long sorrow-And yet I have my joy:
My sons were faithful, and they fought.
And the mind of Pearse was projected
into a poor cabin in Connemara, as was the
mind of that other townsman, MacSwiney,
into the rural environment of Ballingeary,
where "the essential passions of the heart
found a better soil in which to attain their
maturity".
The sincere Sentiment of Love of
Country, of Love of Kind, of Love of God,
has each had its martyrs; that is the ultimate
acid test, and here posturing Sentimentality
has no place.
