When we speak of the Maigue Poets we are invariably referring to those boon
companions, Sean Ó Tuama and Aindrias Mac Craith, who sang their Gaelic
songs beside the river Maigue, at Croom, in the County Limerick, about the
middle of the eighteenth century. A century later other poets were singing beside the Maigue,
but this time in the Adare countryside, and in the English language. There were the de
Veres, Aubrey and Stephen and, a little before their time, Gerald Griffin, the poet of
" Sweet Adare."
The claim has frequently been made for Adare that it is Ireland's most beautiful village;
and anybody who has ever seen its broad, clean streets and its neat thatched cottages will
readily admit that there is nothing very extravagant about the claim. Certainly one of the
fairest views in Ireland confronts a sightseer looking upstream from the Maigue bridge at
Adare. In one sweep the eye takes in a wide, gently-falling cascade, the battered remains of a
proud Geraldine keep rising straight up from the water's edge and, further back, set against
a dark-green background of encircling woods, the grey ruins of a Franciscan abbey. Of that
ruined abbey, Father Donatus Mooney, in his History of the Franciscan Convents in Ireland,
compiled in Louvain, in 1617, wrote:
"Of all our Munster monasteries there was none more celebrated than that of Adare,
whose ruins look down on the silvery Maigue." [note: Quoted in Duffy's Hibernian Magazine, October, 1860.]
The abbey was founded in 1464 by
Thomas, Earl of Kildare, and Judith, his
wife, and was consecrated in honour of
Saint Michael, the archangel, on 29
September, 1466, when its noble founders
presented it with two silver chalices, and a
bell which cost ten pounds. Many of the
chief local Irish families gladly combined
with its Norman founders in building and
equipping the abbey; the belfry was
erected by Cornelius O'Sullivan, who also
presented the commw1ity with a silver
chalice washed with gold; O'Brien of Ara
built the dormitory, and Rory O'Dea
completed the cloisters; the refectory was
added by Marianus O'Hickey. Margaret
Fitzgibbon, wife of Cornelius O'Dea,
built the great chapel, the smaller ones
being erected by John, son of the Earl of
Desmond, and Margaret, wife of Thomas
Fitzmaurice.
But the abbey enjoyed only a comparatively
short life of peace, for, all too
soon, the storm of religious persecution
began to blow from the east across Ireland.
And when the storm blew at its fiercest,
Adare's Franciscan abbey bore the full
brunt of its fury. The death blow came one
morning in 1646, when the building was
attacked and burned by a force of Cromwellian
troopers. Two of the friars were
slaughtered, and two more were taken
prisoner; the rest escaped and fled through
the woods. There is extant an Irish poem of
fifty-five four-lined stanzas which mourns
the fate that overtook the Adare Franciscans.
It is in the form of a dialogue between
the charred remains of the abbey and the
ghost of Father William O'Hickey, one of
the martyred friars. The abbey asks God
if He has not slept while death and destruction
visited the gentle and devoted Franciscans-
Dias díobh marbh, is dias i láimh,
Is an chuid eile ar seachrán,
Is mise thar a n-éis, mo thrua!
Mar ghleas magaidh le Gall-shlua!
(Two of them dead, and two in prison/
And the rest scattered/ And I after them,
alas!/ An object of mockery to the foreign
host.)
The ghost of Father O'Hickey consoles
the abbey, saying that now it most truly
resembles Saint Francis for, since the raid,
it bears upon itself the scars of the stigmata. [note: The whole poem in Mungret Annual, 1903.] 
In all, there were three abbeys in Adare,
for the Trinitarians and Augustinians also
had houses there. The Trinitarian abbey
was founded in 1230 by John Fitzgerald of
Kildare; and the Augustinian abbey was
founded eighty-five years later by the
Earl of Kildare. The Trinitarians wore a
white habit, having a cross of red-and-blue
on it, and the Order devoted itself to the
redemption of Christian slaves from the
Moors.
After the confiscations, the broken abbeys
of Adare and the lands that had belonged
to them changed hands a number of times
before finally coming into the possession
of Thady Quinn in 1684. A descendant of
that Thady Quinn, in the person of the
first Earl of Dunraven, repaired portion of
the Trinitarian abbey and, in 1811, handed
it back to the Catholics for their use as a
parish church, which purpose it still serves.
In l854, a roof was laid on the remaining
portion of the ruins, and this part of the
abbey was given to the Sisters of Charity
for a convent and a school. So, after a lapse
of two hundred years, a great wrong was
in goodly part undone. The Augustinian
abbey was re-roofed at the beginning of
the nineteenth century, and has since been
used for Protestant worship.
Though far inland, Adare is reached by
the tide which flows, first up the Shannon,
and then seven or eight miles up the
Maigue, to wash the base of the old
Desmond castle at the bridge. On very
rare occasions it goes as far up as Drehidtrasna;
and once it is said to have reached
all the way up to Caherass, near Croom,
surprising anglers there with a supply of
fluke. To the mediaeval traders Adare was
a well-known port of call, and the flat-bottomed
boats of the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries had little difficulty in
sailing up the winding channel between
the high mud banks. It is strange to reflect
that up to the old timber bridge at the
Ford of the Oak-for that is what Adare
(Ath Dara) means-laden, slow-moving
vessels came countless times, bringing wines
and spices, rich foreign clothing and
exotic products of all kinds to the proud
burgesses of Adare.
Gerald Griffin, though his name will
forever be associated with the place, was
not a native of Adare, having been born in
Limerick city, in 1803. His father, a Clareman,
had served in Grattan's Volunteers,
and at the time of Gerald's birth was managing
a not very flourishing brewery in
Limerick which, very soon, was forced to
close down. The family then moved to
Fairy Lawn, on the Shannon; but Gerald,
when he reached school-going age, was
sent back to Limerick to be taught by
Richard Pierce Mac Elligott, a noted hedge-schoolmaster,
Gaelic scholar and patriot.
Mac Elligott compiled an Irish grammar
that was used extensively by the great
antiquarian, John O'Donovan. In 1798,
he was arrested and lodged in Limerick
gaol. A letter written by him while he
was in prison gives a harrowing account
of his experiences:
What shall I suffer walking up and down
this dismal place from light to light, with
no companion but a man who, three times
flogged, lies dying in a corner, a still-breathing
corpse; and legions of rats of all
ages, which have forgotten the timidity of
their species and lord it here with hereditary
sway . ... There were three happy fellows
on every lamp on the bridge as I was crossing
here; the lantern hoops were breaking so I
must wait till some kind friend drops off
They nearly took up the little footpath,
and the toes of some of them were touching
it. [note: Cf.: Worthies of Thomond, Second Series, R. Herbert.] 
In l820, the parents and other members
of the Griffin family emigrated to America,
and Gerald went to live with a brother of
his who was practising as a doctor in Adare.
Though it was intended that he should
follow in the footsteps of his brother, and
make medicine his profession, Gerald,
before he was twenty had chosen literature
for a career. Even when he was still in his
teens, his literary tastes showed unusual
discernment and ability, and clearly held
the promise of future achievement.
From Adare he sent regular contributions
to the Limerick Advocate, and so popular
did his contributions become that he was
appointed editor of the paper. But it was a
post he was not to hold for long, for some
articles of his drew strong protests from
Dublin Castle, and these were echoed by a
notice of dismissal for the youthful editor
from the "safe" proprietor of the Advocate.
Richard Pierce Mac Elligott's pupil was
beginning to prove his mettle.
It was in Adare that Griffin really
launched himself on his literary career.
Besides having made a brief trial of
journalism, he experimented with drama,
and his first effort in that field was Aguire,
a Spanish tragedy now lost. Evidently
well pleased with himself, he now wrote
Gisippus, a tragedy modelled on classical
drama; and with this stowed safely away
in his pocket he set out for London,
buoyant with all the hopes and dreams
of a twenty-year old, and sought there
fame and fortune as did so many of his
countrymen before and since that time.
And like so many of those who went
with that end in view, he soon discovered
that in that great metropolis fame and
fortune were hardly won, and that failure
was far more easily thrust upon one than
success.
He failed to convince anyone of the
merits of his play; but could he have
peered into the future he would have
discovered that one day Gisippus would
be produced and well received in Drury
Lane-but that would be after its author's
death. And so Gerald Griffin lived for a
time in secret and desperate poverty,
until he received an introduction to the
editor of the Literary Gazette, who found
some remunerative work for his pen.
Fortune at last began to smile on him,
and after years of bitter disappointment
he had a drama accepted. He then wrote
Hollandtide Tales, a collection of seven
rather gruesome tales told round a rural
hearth. It was a success, and it showed the
author where his genius lay. London had
by now ceased to attract him-in fact,
he was beginning to hate the great city,
and he longed for a sight of Ireland and of
home; for the ripple of the Maigue and the
sighing of the wind through the oak
woods of Adare. And when, at last, he
sat in a coach, with the miles between him
and London steadily increasing, he gave
poetic vent to his feelings:
Adieu! thou pestilential air,
Where death and pain reside!
Where every brow is dark with care,
And every eye with pride-
Where vapours change the maiden hue
Of winter's cloudless moon,
And man's unwinking eye may view
The burning sun at noon.

Away, away, fair Taunton Dene
Lies nearer to the West-
Now fast o'er Hounslow's fading scene
Night draws his gloomy vest.
Now, while I watch the tiny beam
Shot from each beauteous star,
I think of Ireland and of him
Who reads their lore afar.
At home in Ireland, at Adare, and later
in Pallaskenry, some miles farther north,
he continued his literary output, producing
Tales of the Munster Festivals and Tales of a
Jury Room. In l828 came his most famous
work, The Collegians, bringing him £800,
which he sent to America to his parents.
The materials the novelist wove together
in The Collegians were drawn mainly
from the notes he had taken and, the
feelings he had experienced when, as a
young reporter for the Limerick Advocate,
he had attended at the Limerick Courthouse
in which John Scanlan was being
tried for the murder of Eily Hanly, or the
Colleen Bawn, to give her the name by
which the world now remembers her.
Eily's father, Michael Hanly, worked a
small farm at Ballycahane, a few miles
north of Croom. When Eily was about
six or seven years of age she was sent to
be reared in the house of her maternal
uncle, John Connery, who resided nearer
to Croom, at Grange Hill. She grew up
to be very pretty, and by the time she was
fifteen was famous in the district for her
good looks.
One night, two men who had been
fowling in the neighbourhood of Tory
Hill, called at John Connery's door,
requesting a night's lodging, and stating
they were too far from the house they
were visiting to go back there at that late
hour. The two men were the twenty-three
year-old Lieutenant John Scanlan, who had
served in the Royal Navy, and his man,
Stephen Sullivan, both of whom were
later to die for the murder of Eily, and to
be reborn in the pages of The Collegians as
Hardress Cregan and Danny Mann.
After that first night Scanlan paid many
visits to Connery's house and, at length,
persuaded Eily to elope with him. She left
the house on Sunday, 29 June, 1819, while
her uncle was at Mass, and she took with
her £100 in notes and twelve gold guineas.
Sullivan, disguised as a priest, and unrecognised
by Eily, conducted a mock
marriage ceremony between herself and
Scanlan. In a very short time Scanlan
tired of his bride, and employed Sullivan
to murder her and throw her body into the
Shannon, somewhere between Glin and
Kilrush. The discovery of the pinioned
body near Kilrush some weeks later, and
a chain of evidence, clearly pointed the
finger of suspicion at Scanlan; but presumably
owing to the social standing of
his family in the county, the law seemed
reluctant to move against him. Matters
might have rested so had not dissatisfaction
at the delay in making an arrest been
expressed by Thomas Spring Rice, the
Resident Magistrate in Foynes, and also by
the Knight of Glin.
Eventually, the law got moving, and on
Saturday, 13 November, 1819, some two
months after the discovery of Eily's body, a
troop of dragoons and mounted police
under Major Vokes, the Police Magistrate,
and accompanied by Thomas Spring Rice,
rode out from Croom to Ballycahane
House, and arrested Scanlan, whom they
found hiding in a loft in an outhouse.
On 11 March, 1820, he was charged
at the spring Assizes in Limerick with the
murder of Eily Hanly, and was defended
by no less a person than the great Dan
O'Connell himself. But not even
O'Connell's forensic might could save
him, and he was sentenced to die at
Gallows Green, on 16 March, 1820. When
the horses drawing the carriage that was
conveying the doomed man from the
prison to the scaffold reached Baal's
Bridge they refused to cross it-for a horse
will not take a murderer across water,
says tradition-and Scanlan alighted and
calmly walked the rest of the way to the
place where he was to die. It is believed
that his body was later buried in the family
burial plot in Crecora. Sullivan was
arrested some months later in Kerry, and
met the same fate as his master on 27 July,
1820.
That then was the rather sordid story
that was the basis for The Collegians; a
story that would also inspire Boucicault' s
melodramatic Colleen Bawn, and Benedict's
musical, Lily of Killarney. The only other
novel Griffin wrote, The Duke of Monmouth,
was not a success.
Today, Gerald Griffin is best remembered
for his novel, The Collegians, and for his
poetry, of which he wrote a considerable
amount, most of it of good quality, and
graced by a delicacy and gentleness that
reflects the character of the poet himself.
One of his sisters became a Sister of Charity;
another became a Presentation Nun; and
a cousin entered the Sisterhood of Saint
Vincent de Paul. Hence the inspiration for
his poems, The Sister of Charity and Nano
Nagle. His My Mary of the Curling Hair
reminds of the loveliest of the Scottish
love songs; and scarcely less pleasing is his
light-hearted I Love My Love in the Morning.
And there is something hauntingly beautiful
about Sleep that like the Couched Dove-
Sleep that like the couched dove,
Broods o'er the weary eye,
Dreams that with soft heavings move
The heart of memory-
Far from thee be startling fears,
And dreams the guilty dream;
No Banshee scare thy drowsy ears
With her ill-omened scream.
But tones of fairy minstrelsy
Float like the ghosts of sound o'er thee,
Soft as the chapel's distant bell,
And lull thee to a sweet farewell.
Hither bring your drowsy store,
Gather'd from the bright lusmore,
Shake o'er temples-soft and deep,
The comfort of the poor man's sleep.
Other of his poems like Orange and Green,
The Bridal of Malahide, Hy Brasil, Lines to a
Seagull and The Shannon's Stream are little
the worse for having constantly found a
place in the school anthologies. In Would
You Choose a Friend Griffin reveals the
sociable side of his nature. Choose not, he
warns:
He on whose lean and bloodless cheek
The red grape leaves no laughing streak,
On whose dull white brow and clouded eye
Cold thought and care sit heavily.
That man is very bad company, he says;
and so is
... he around whose jewelled nose
The blood of the red grape freely flows;
Whose pursy frame as he fronts the board
Shakes like a wine sack newly stored,
In whose half-shut, moist, and sparkling eye,
The wine god revels cloudily.
Then comes the poet's advice:
But he who takes his wine in measure,
Mingling wit and sense with pleasure,
Who likes good wine for the joy it brings,
And merrily laughs and gaily sings:
With heart and bumper always full,
Never maudlin, never dull,
Your friend let him be,
'Tween you and me,
That man is excellent company.
He wrote some long dramatic poems,
including Shanid Castle, which is based on
a legend of the Geraldines; and the Fate
of Cathleen, based on the well-known
legend of Glendalough. Another romantic
legend of the daughter of an Adare
Geraldine and her rustic lover he made the
subject of Matt Hyland, a poem which runs
to 2,600 lines. It is in this poem one finds
those oft-quoted and delightful stanzas
that so fittingly describe the sylvan splendour
of "Sweet Adare":
Oh, sweet Adare, oh, lovely vale,
Oh soft retreat of sylvan splendour,
Nor summer sun, nor morning gale,
E'er hailed a scene more softly tender.
How shall I tell the thousand charms,
Within thy verdant bosom dwelling,
Where lulled in Nature's fostering arms
Soft peace abides, and Joy excelling.
Ye morning airs, how sweet at dawn
The slumbering boughs your songs
awaken,
Or linger o'er the silent lawn,
With odour of the harebell taken.
Thou rising sun, how richly gleams
Thy smile from far Knockfierna's
mountain,
O'er waving woods and bounding streams,
And many a grove and glancing fountain.
Ye clouds of noon, how freshly there,
When summer heats the open meadows,
O'er parched hill and valley fair,
All cooly lie your veiling shadows.
Ye rolling shades and vapours gray,
Slow creeping o'er the golden heaven,
How soft ye seal the eye of day,
And wreathe the dusky brow of even.
There winds the Maigue as silver clear,
Among the elms so sweetly flowing.
There fragrant in the early year,
Wild roses on the banks are blowing.
There wild duck sport on rapid wing,
Beneath the alder's leafy awning,
And sweetly there the small birds sing,
When daylight on the hill is dawning.
In 1838, at the height of his fame,
Gerald Griffin turned his back on the
world, and joined the Order of the
Irish Christian Brothers. Two years he
gave, without earthly award or acclamation,
to the education of poor boys in the
North Monastery at Cork, before typhus
cut short his gentle and unselfish career.
It can be said of him that his is a more
authentic Irish voice than that of his near
neighbour, Aubrey de Vere, who somehow
never managed to bring himself right out
of the Big House. Though not having the
same Gaelic background to his work as the
Young Ireland singers who succeeded him,
Gerald Griffin, nevertheless, must be
numbered among the very earliest of those
Irish writers who strove to produce in
English a literature that would be racy of
" Sweet Adare "
the soil. He is the first English-speaking
singer of the Maigue countryside. Had he
lived a century earlier he would, in all
probability, have sat in Ó Tuama's tavern
in Croom, an honoured member of that
sweet-voiced company who called themselves
Filí na Máighe, the Poets of the
Maigue. (The Capuchin Annual, 1961).
And he would have with him there Tomas
Ó Tuama of Adare, Gaelic poet and
teacher of languages, who would one day
write a lament for his namesake, Sean Ó
Tuama:
Mo chreach, mo dheacair - se, marbh gan
luaid fa líg
Ollamh na ranna do scanadh is na nduanta
a shniomh,
Tug srotha na ndearca go frasach le
gruana Gaoidheal
I gCroma ó taisceadh i bhfeartaibh Ó
Tuama an Ghrinn.
(My woe, my trouble, dead without
power under a headstone/ The master
who scanned the verses and wrote the
poems/ It brought streams of tears flooding
to the cheeks of the Gael/Since in a
grave in Croom was deposited Ó Tuama
the Gay)
John Francis O'Donnell, that gifted
Limerick poet, who was born in 1837,
was the author of many poems, one of the
best is that which he wrote on Adare:
Soft sleeps the village in the maze
Of dreamy elm and sycamore;
Soft slides the river's rosy tide
Through blossomed sedges by the shore,
Rushes and pendant willows hoar.
The little boat moored in the cove
Takes no pulsation from the stream,
But shadowed in the water lies
The lovely image of a dream . ...
Three hundred years in channelled stones
Hewn in some quarry vast and fair,
But touched with melancholy grey-
The habit of our Irish air-
Which slays but still knows when to spare.
Chancel, quadrangle, tower are here,
Gaunt cloisters, roof and mullions riven,
With that clear interspace through which
Souls, tired of flesh, looked out to heaven.
Like Griffin, O'Donnell died young,
death claiming him in his thirty-seventh
year.
While we feast our eyes on the natural
beauty of Adare, and grow lyrical about it,
as did Gerald Griffin and John Francis
O'Donnell, it is unlikely that we will fail
to notice at the same time the wonderful
richness of the land about us. As one would
expect, that richness did not fail to catch
the eye of that most observant and cultured
traveller of the nineteenth century, Arthur
Young.
"Land lets at Adare," he wrote, "from
10 to 40 shillings per acre, average 20
shillings. The richest in the county is the
carcasses on the Maag, which lets at 30
shillings to 36 shillings, a tract 5 miles
long and 2 broad, down to the Shannon,
which are better than those on that river;
the soil is a kind of yellow and blue clay,
of which they make bricks, but there is a
surface of blue mould."
When it flows under the old stone
bridge at Adare, the Maigue enters the
last lap of its journey to the sea. It travels
lazily westward for a short distance, till
it comes close to the road to Kildimo,
then swings north, to flow, shortly, by
the charred remains of Curragh Chase
House, accidently burned in December,
1941. And so, once more, we link the
Maigue with poets and with poetry, for
Curragh Chase was the home of the poets,
Aubrey and Stephen de Vere.
Aubrey de Vere was born at Curragh
Chase, on 10 January, 1814. His father was
Stephen de Vere, whose family, long
settled in the district, traced its descent
through Aubrey Vere, second son of the
sixteenth Earl of Oxford, who was born
about 1555. His mother was Mary Spring
Rice, sister of that Thomas Spring Rice,
whom we have already mentioned as the
man chiefly responsible for bringing the
murderer of the Colleen Bawn to justice.
Thomas Spring Rice, whose statue crowns
the tall column in the People's Park,
Limerick, was lovingly remembered for
the efforts he made to redress the wrongs
of the people in the early decades of the
nineteenth century. He was a barrister by
profession, and was Member of Parliament
for Limerick from 1820 to 1832. Eoghan
Caomhanach of Kilmallock, one of the
very last of Limerick's Gaelic poets, wrote
a song to help his election cause-
Le cheile anois leimeadh, gan scath gan
bhaoigheal,
Gach treinfhear de phreimh thine alainn
Gaoidheal,
Gan staonadh ar aon chor go brach arís
On bhFéinnidh do shaor iad, Tomás de Rís.
(Let us all leap now together, without
fear or danger/ Every brave man of the
beautiful race of the Gael/With no
deflecting any more/ From the Leader
who saved them, Thomas Rice)
Though a staunch supporter of Catholic
Emancipation, Thomas Spring Rice opposed
the Repeal of the Union and, as a
result, lost much of the popularity he had
so deservedly enjoyed. He was made
Chancellor of the Exchequer in l835, and
in l839 was raised to the peerage, becoming
the first Lord Monteagle. But the "good
drop" was always in the Spring Rices; and
in 1914 resurgent Ireland saluted Mary
Spring Rice, who sailed the perilous seas
with Erskine Childers to bring guns to the
men who were planning to fight for Irish
freedom. Aubrey de Vere's mother, it will
be remembered, bore the same name as her
valiant kinswoman of the Howth gunrunning.
In 1832 Aubrey entered Trinity College,
with a view to taking Orders and becoming
a minister of the Established Church.
After graduating in 1837 he went to
England. In England it was a period of
wonderful intellectual activity and intense
religious questioning, with the Great
Oxford Movement, headed by John Henry
Newman, just getting under way. De
Vere found himself attracted to the Movement,
though as yet, and for long afterwards,
he showed no particular inclination
to become a Catholic. But religion,
philosophy and poetry continued to absorb
him completely. His ceaseless questionings
during those years are the questionings of
a man engaged on a search, a search that
for Aubrey de Vere was to end on the
morning of 15 November, 1851, when in
the archbishop's chapel, at Avignon of
the Popes, he was received into the Catholic
Church.
In Trinity, Aubrey had been on terms
of the closest friendship with the celebrated
mathematician, William Rowan Hamilton,
who became attached to Aubrey's sister,
Ellen-an attachment that was not returned.
Later, in England, he was to become a
friend of some of the greatest lights of the
age: among them Newman, Manning,
Wiseman, Carlyle, Wordsworth, Browning
and Tennyson. Indeed, it was he who
first brought Wordsworth and Tennyson
together. Tem1yson spent some time as
his guest at Curragh Chase in 1848; and
we have his Lady Clara Vere de Vere to
show his close friendship with the family.
A poet of no mean order himself,
Aubrey de Vere felt happy in the company
of poets. His father, too, had poetic gifts,
and wrote sonnets that later won the
praises of Wordsworth. From his youth
Aubrey had a tremendous admiration for
the poetry of Samuel Taylor Coleridge.
Sara Coleridge, the poet's daughter, afterwards
said of de Vere:
"I have lived among poets a great deal,
and I have known greater poets than he
is, but a more entire poet, one more a
poet in his whole mind and temperament,
I never knew or met with." [note: Aubrey de Vere, Wilfrid Ward.]
Returning from England during the
great famine, Aubrey, with his brother
Stephen, strove tirelessly to bring relief
to the stricken. They expressed dissatisfaction
with the Government relief schemes,
that were of no benefit to the old and
infirm, and did nothing to develop the
resources of the country, and suggested
that it would be better to buy Indian meal
with the money allocated, and distribute
it to the hungry. This terrible period drew
from Aubrey a graphic poem entitled
The Year of Sorrow, of which the following
are some stanzas:-
Fall, snow, and cease not! Flake by flake
The decent winding-sheet compose.
Thy task is just and pious; make
An end of blasphemies and woes.
Fall flake by flake! by thee alone,
Last friend, the sleeping draught is given:
Kind nurse, by thee the couch is strewn
The couch whose covering is from heaven.
Descend and clasp the mountain's crest;
Inherit plain and valley deep:
This night, on thy maternal breast,
A vanquished nation dies in sleep.
Lo! from the starry Temple gates
Death rides, and bears the flag of peace;
The combatants he separates;
He bids the wrath of ages cease.
Fall, snow! in stillness fall, like dew,
On temple's roof and cedar's fan;
And mould thyself on pine and yew;
And on the awful face of man.
On quaking moor and mountain moss,
With eyes upstaring at the sky,
And arms extended like a cross,
The long-expectant sufferers lie.
Bend o'er them, white-robed Acolyte!
Put forth thine hand from cloud and mist,
And minister the last sad Rite,
Where altar there is none, nor priest.
This night the Absolver issues forth:
This night the Eternal Victim bleeds:
O winds and woods-O heaven and earth!
Be still this night. The Rite proceeds!
In 1848, Aubrey de Vere published a
work called English Misrule and Irish
Misdeeds, and forwarded copies of it to a
number of his friends. John Stuart Mill,
the English political economist, received
a copy and, while praising it in his letter
of acknowledgment, stated that he did
not agree with the author that emigration
was the remedy for Irish misery, but
thought that the remedy lay in the reclamation
of waste lands and the alteration of
landed tenures. In the same letter he wrote:
"Perhaps, also, I should not let off the
generality of Irish landlords quite as easily
as you do, though there are among them.
not a few of the most meritorious landlords
(probably) upon earth." [note: Ibid.]
William Smith O'Brien acknowledged
his copy in a letter that was in keeping with
the character of an Irish aristocrat who,
before the year was out, was to hear
sentence of death passed upon him for
leading a revolt for Irish freedom.
Aubrey de Vere never was a revolutionary
or a sympathiser with revolution,
and his idea of patriotism, though sincere
and ardent, was shared by few in Ireland.
His ideal was to live in some kind of
perpetual Middle Ages, professing honour
and chivalry, and rendering loyalty to
established order and royalty. Republicanism,
the overthrow of landlordism, agrarian
reform, these to him represented
Jacobinism in its worst and bloodiest form.
His sympathies with the men who
fought for Ireland did not come further
down than the days of Sarsfield. He was a
hundred per cent Unionist. When bishop
Moriarty of Kerry violently denounced
Fenianism in 1866, de Vere wrote and
complimented him, saying he could not
understand how anyone could be a good
Catholic who was not at the same time a
thorough Loyalist, both as regards the
Church and the State. It utterly passed his
comprehension how certain of the priests
could support the Fenians; and when the
Land War came, and practically all the
priests, and most of the bishops ranged
themselves on the side of the tenants, he
was bewildered. In 1881, he wrote:-
"The recent Resolutions of the Bishops
at Maynooth were a surprise to me . . .
the Resolutions said not a word about
Duties, but spoke strongly about Rights,
respecting which the people seem for some
time to have been sufficient awake."
In 1885, he wrote a pamphlet on the
Irish Land Question, and sent copies of
it to, among others, Cardinal Newman
and Matthew Arnold. In acknowledging
it, the Cardinal wrote: "I think your
pamphlet a good one, but I am ignorant of
the elements of the question." Arnold, in
his letter, said:
"If you look at what I have said about
Ireland in the last number of the Nineteenth
Century you will see I do not believe in
government of Ireland by the 'Loyalists'
. . . I do not believe that the landed class
will retain power even in Scotland and
England, nor do I wish them to retain
power."
Aubrey de Vere's long life came to a
close at Curragh Chase on 21 January,
1902. In all, he had written some thirty
books, mainly of poetry, philosophical,
religious and otherwise. The Pope, in an
audience he had given him, had expressed
a wish that he should write some poems
in honour of the Blessed Virgin. He did so;
and this is perhaps the loveliest of them:-
He willed to lack; He willed to bear;
He willed by suffering to be schooled;
He willed the chains of flesh to wear;
Yet from her arms the world He ruled.
As tapers mid the noontide glow
With merged yet separate radiance burn,
With human taste and touch even so
The things He knew He willed to learn.
He sat beside the lowly door;
His homeless eyes appeared to trace
In evening skies remembered lore
And shadows of His Father's face.
One only knew Him, She alone
Who nightly to His cradle crept,
And lying like the moonbeam prone,
Worshipped her Maker as He slept.
But despite all that he wrote, Aubrey de
Vere is chiefly remembered today for
his handful of patriotic ballads. Is there
anybody who has been to school in Ireland
in the past forty years who could not
recite:
Does any man dream that a Gael can fear?
Of a thousand deeds let him learn but one!
The Shannon swept onward broad and clear,
Between the leaguers and broad Athlone.
And as well as A Ballad of Athlone there was
A Ballad of Sarsfield, and the song of
The Little Black Rose, and The Dirge of
Rory O'Moore, and The March to Kinsale-
O'er many a river bridg'd with ice,
Through many a vale with snow-drifts dumb;
Past quaking fen and precipice
The Princes of the North are come.
Lo! those are they that year by year
Roll'd back the tide of England's war.
Rejoice Kinsale! thy help is near,
That wondrous winter march is o'er.
Though their author could never have
imagined it, and certainly would not have
wished it, these songs became part of the
literature of the resurgence, and helped in
their own way to rouse the spirit that
raised on high, to the salute of revolutionary
gun fire, that tri-coloured flag of the Irish
Republic that would one day be wrapped
round the coffin of his kinswoman, Mary
Spring Rice, when men of the Irish
Republican Army would bear her to last resting
place in Mount Trenchard, near Foynes.
Aubrey's brother, Stephen de Vere,
translated the Odes of Horace into English
verse; and not least known among his
compositions is his translation of the Irish
song, Pearla an Bhrollaigh Bhain, The Snowy
Breasted Pearl. Stephen had become a
Catholic in 1847, four years before his
more famous brother, his conversion being
due in no small measure to the wonderful
faith displayed by the Famine victims in
that dread year. He was far more popular
with the people, far more in sympathy
with near national aspirations, than was
Aubrey. In a letter written late in life,
Aubrey says:-
"From his early youth Stephen's life
has been one of labour for Ireland. He has
saved sons of hers from the gallows - laboured
in their schools-abstained from
wine for twenty years that he might
encourage temperance among the poor,
brought dying men into his house that
they might have more comfort in death,
pleaded their cause in public and private
life, and during thirty years he has reduced
the rental of the property by about a fourth
below what would have been considered
the fair value.
"You know of his going out to America
as a steerage passenger, I think it was then
a six weeks' voyage, that he might speak as
a witness respecting the sufferings of
emigrants. He has always been a Liberal,
as he is now; and (unlike me) he approved
of Gladstone's recent Land Act, having
himself recommended nearly the same
thing to the Government of 1870." [note: Ibid.]
Stephen de Vere-or Sir Stephen, as he
is entitled to be called-died at Foynes on
10 November, 1904, and with his death the
baronetcy, gained by his grandfather, Sir
Vere Hunt, in 1774, became extinct.
The Maigue Country has never lacked
poets. It was only in the Spring of 1963
that Daithí Ó Ceantuil was laid to rest in
Croma an tSubhachais-Croom of the Jubilations.
Daithi, who could versify equally
well in Irish or in English, was the author
of a long poem called Where Maigue's
Bright Waters Flow; and I feel there could
be no more fitting ceangal or envoi with
which to end our story than the final
stanzas of Daithi's poem telling of the
river's course through "Sweet Adare" to
the Shannon:-
There woodlands gently waving spread
welcoming arms wide
To greet me in Adare' s sweet vale, flower-strewn
on every side.
Yet tho' sylvan beauties charm me and
tho' floral welcomes spring
From that fair land by my waters, 'tis a
requiem that I sing,
A low-voiced plaintive requiem, an eerie
haunting caoin
Charged with all the lingering memories of
a long-forgotten scene,
Saddened by the ghosts of sorrows that
haunt my banks, nor sleep
With the long- dead knights and ladies that
oft thronged the palace-keep.
Peaceful be your slumbers by my waters,
warriors all,
Black friar, brown-robed brother, knight
and man-at arms tall.
For you no more the trumpet and the war
cry, for you the matin bells no longer ring.
For your castle now is rubble and your
church a broken thing.
And the Mass - bell calleth elsewhere on the
early morning air,
While the brethren slumber quietly in their
cells in "Sweet Adare."
Peace to your souls, oh heroes all, who
sleep there side by side,
While I keep tryst with my ageless love,
the Shannon's flowing tide.
