James Stephens’s book of translations from the Gaelic poets, Reincarnations, was
acclaimed in its own time, and it remains his greatest single volume of poetry. It is
interesting that Gogarty in his gentle poetic tribute to Stephens singles it out for
special commendation:
Where are you, Spirit, who could pass into our hearts and all
Hearts of little children, hearts of trees and elves?
Where is the pen that could, sweetly deep and whimsical,
Make old poets sing again far better than themselves?
But posterity has neglected them, as it has neglected so much of the poet's achievement
outside of The Crock of Gold. It is an unjust neglect because Reincarnations remains
the greatest volume of translations from
the Gaelic ever written; it is also the book
in which Stephens comes closest to absolute
greatness as a poet. This claim will, of
course, require some strenuous arguing, in
view of the mass of work which has been
done in this field over the past hundred
years and more. In 1918, when the book
first appeared, writers of such various
distinction as Walsh, Ferguson, Mangan,
Hyde, MacDonagh and Pearse had worked
hard in the genre and had produced outstanding
results. Since then Austin Clarke
Sean Ó Faolain, David Marcus, Sean Ó
Tuama and Thomas Kinsella, men of
greater scholarship than Stephens, have
translated the Gaelic poetry with more
verbal and formal accuracy than Stephens
could ever claim. Finally, there is Mr.
O'Connor's Kings, Lords and Commons, a
dazzling, panoramic work, the product of
a lifetime's endeavour which ambitiously
ranges from the early monastic glosses to
the bawdy vigour of Merriman; a book
which, moreover, bears the marks of a
scrupulous and sympathetic scholarship. It
is in O'Connor's case that most qualifications
must be made, and his work provides
a convenient point of departure.
O'Connor, in his preface to Kings, Lords
and Commons, writes that Stephens's work
"can scarcely be called translations. They
are fine original works from which the
material was taken from the Irish". This
judgement echoes Stephens's own admission
in his note to Reincarnations.
"For although everything in it can be
referred to the Irish of from one hundred
to three hundred years ago the word
translation would be a misdescription ....
Some of the poems owe no more than a
phrase, a line, half a line, to the Irish, and
around these scraps I have blown a bubble
of verse and made my poem. In other
cases, where the matter of the poem is
almost entirely taken from the Irish, I
have yet followed my own instinct in
the arrangement of it, and the result
might be called new poems."
May we not say that both writers limit
the meaning of the word translation to the
rendering of the words from one language
in the words of another? Surely to transfer
successfully poetic experience from one
language to another has a claim to be
called translation also. Sometimes the
method of close and "faithful" adherence
to the form and the verbal sequence of the
original produces something completely
alien from the spirit of the original; sometimes,
and frequently in the case of
O'Connor, it recreates the spirit of the
original with a fidelity that is almost
miraculous. Stephens's general method - we
shall see that it is not invariably his
method-is the opposite to O'Connor's;
he "follows his own instinct", picks out
what he regards as the central, the energising
themes and motifs of the original and
in translating the poem he often transposes
lines and phrases to suit the movement of
the thought and imagery in English. And
because his instinct is so reliable, I believe
that the entire poetic experience of the
Gaelic poems remains unimpaired in the
English; the poem is not so much rendered
as re-created. For the sake of illustration,
let us take a great Irish poem which both
Stephens and O'Connor have translated
into English, each in his own method. A
consideration of the last two stanzas will
illustrate their different approaches.
The poem, An Tan d'Aistrigh, by the
seventeenth-century poet, Egan O'Rahilly,
is one of the great elegies of Gaelic literature.
The disinherited poet has been driven to
live on a barren cliff in Kerry, where he
cannot sleep with the roaring of the wave
nearby. To his tormented imagination the
wave becomes a sort of animate symbol;
its noise a lament for his former patrons,
the MacCarthy chieftains of Cork, and also
a malicious reminder of his own social
degradation. By the end of the poem the
roaring of the wave has also taken on the
tone of a despairing lament for the Gaelic
Ireland which had disappeared irrevocably
with the broken Treaty of Limerick in
1691. Here are the last two stanzas of the
original, wherein the poet builds up to a
savage exasperation with the wave, and
all it has come to represent for him:
Do shearg mo chroidhe im chliteach do
bhuaedhir mo leann;
Na seabhaic nár fríth cinnte, ag ar dhual
an eang
Ó Chaiseal go Tuinn Chlíodhna's go
Tuamhain tall,
A mhailte's a maoin díth-chreachta ag
sluaightibh Gall.
A thonn so thíos is aoirde céim go hard,
Meabhair mo chinn claoidhte ót bheiceach tá;
Cabhair dá dtigheadh arís go hEirinn bhain
Do ghlam nach binn do dhingfinn fein it
bhraghaid.
What makes this particularly difficult to
translate is the huge orchestral resonance of
the Gaelic assonantal pattern, the only conceivable
instrument to take the charge of
O'Rahilly's mad fury. For the sake of those
who may not understand the principle of
Irish metrics, it might be pointed out that
there is a recurrent assonantal pattern in
every line of every stanza above. The
pattern might be crudely rendered in
English sounds as follows: the metre is
iambic and the dashes represent unstressed
syllables:
- ow / - ee/ - ee/ -ay / -aw.
This pattern repeats itself in every one of
the lines in the last stanza and accounts
for its astonishing music. Obviously there
is a tremendous challenge to the translator
here. The parallel text of Dinneen and
O'Donoghoe in the Irish Texts Society
edition- the one that Stephens must have
used- makes no effort to take up the
challenge:
My heart has withered up within my breast,
the humours of my body are troubled,
Because the warriors who were not found
niggardly, and who inherited the land
From Cashel to the waves of Cliodhna
and across to Thomond,
Have their dwellings and their possessions
ravaged by foreign hosts.
Thou wave below, of highest repute,
loudvoiced,
The senses of my head are overpowered
with thy bellowing ;
Were help to come again to fair Erin,
I would thrust thy discordant clamour
down thy throat.
This is straight, accurate, scholarly translation,
and I think it will be agreed that
it gives no idea of the strangled fury
of O'Rahilly's finish. Here, now, is
O'Connor's version; it will be noted how
closely he adheres to the thought sequence,
metre and stanza form. As to its ultimate
fidelity to the original, it is for the individual
reader to judge.
The heart within my breast tonight is
wild with grief
Because, of all the haughty men who
ruled this place,
North Munster and South Munster to the
wave beneath,
None lives, and where they lived lives
now an alien race.
A, famous wave you sang the livelong
night below;
Small wonder if the noise set my wits
wandering!
swear if help could ever come to Ireland
now
I'd strangle in your raucous throat that
song you sing.
To me this fails dismally-I don't think
that O'Connor himself would regard it as
one of his more outstanding successes -
because it misses the fierce pounding anger;
instead of a savagely eloquent despair it
offers us a mild, distressed bewilderment, a
feeling that O'Rahilly would be utterly
incapable of at any time. This failure is
contained in the phrases "wild with grief"
-"grief" is wrong; "you sang the livelong
night" -the words O'Rahilly uses to
describe the wave's "song" are "beiceach"
which means "scream", and "glam" which
means "howl"; and to end with the phrase
"that song you sing" emasculates the entire
experience, softens and sentimentalises the
impact.
Now I suggest that it is because Mr.
O'Connor attempts the impossible that he
fails. A method of conscientiously following
the author's sequence from line to line
which has served him so well in To the
Blacksmith with a Spade or The Midnight
Court, betrays him completely when he
tries to render the emotional power and
complexity of O'Rahilly's great poem.
Let us see how Stephens who "follows
his own instinct" in the arrangement of it
fares. Recognising, with a combination of
humility and poetic insight that he cannot
hope to parallel O'Rahilly's feat of compression
in English, he gives himself plenty
of room, transposing at will:
O Wave of Cliodna, cease thy bellowing!
And let mine ears forget a while to ring
At thy long, lamentable misery:
The great are dead indeed, the great are dead;
And I, in little time, will stoop my head
And put it under, and will be forgot
With them, and be with them, and thus
be not.
Ease thee, cease thy long keening, cry no
more:
End is, and here is end, and end is sore,
And to all lamentation be there end:
If I might come on thee, O howling friend!
Knowing that sails were drumming on the sea
Westward to Eire, and that help would be
Trampling for her upon a Spanish deck,
I'd ram thy lamentation down thy neck.
That last line is as close to O'Rahilly's as it
is humanly possible to get; it is all there,
the harsh vehement music, the wild
exasperated despair. It is at once a cry from
the heart and a scream from the nerves.
That is the quality that Mr. O'Connor
missed; that neurotic violence with which
O'Rahilly felt his torment, which makes
his symbol of the wave not only a symbol
but an active agent of persecution. This
feeling is just barely sublimated by the
artistic process of his poem and the struggle
to sublimate it into art accounts for the
fierce tension that energises the poem. It
can be said against Stephens's version that
it is too long, inclined to redundancy. This
can be partly explained by the fact that
he transposes some of the earlier matter of
the poem into the final passage. What can
not be said of it, however, is that it is in
any way false to the spirit or matter of the
original. Stephens's intuition told him, too,
that the mood of the poem called for a
massive orchestration and his language
rises finely to the challenge. The first three
lines of the extract carry the hoarse stormy
resonance of wind and wave; it would be
impossible to read them in a subdued tone.
The tone falters momentarilv with the
repetitions of the middle lines, but this
serves only to heighten the force of the
last climactic roar. Stephens succeeds here
where O'Connor fails, because he recognised
that he was dealing with a poem which
could not be caught in translation by any
of the orthodox approaches-by scholarship,
or subtlety, or even extreme sensitivity.
It had to be taken recklessly, by storm; and
that is what Stephens did. And by doing
that he not only achieved a masterly
translation, but a fine original poem in
English.
I have dwelt extensively on this poem - which
he calls The Wave of Cliona in his
Collected Poems, and Clann Cartie in
Reincarnations-because it demonstrates his
normal method of translation. Now, let
us examine some of his exceedingly "free"
adaptations from the Irish, those poems
which, in his own words,
"owe no more than a phrase, a line, half
a line, to the Irish, and around these
scraps I have blown a bubble of verse
and made my poem".
This is the method which he consistently
adopts in dealing with the poems of the
nineteenth-century poet, Antoine Raftery.
Most of the Raftery pieces could not really
be called translations, they deviate so
radically from the originals. He is well
aware of this when he writes:
"From Antoine O'Raftery I have taken
more than from any of the others, and
have treated his matter so familiarly that
a lover of Raftery (and who, having
read a verse of his, does not love him?)
might not know I was indebted to this
poet for my songs.
Stephens overrates Raftery's merits as a
poet. Raftery is not at all of the poetic
stature of the other poets whom he translates-
O'Rahilly, Keating, Ó Bruadair,
Ferriter. He had a light vagrant tunefulness,
unaccompanied either by deep thought or
emotional intensity. His verse is larded
with stock metaphors and secondhand
phrases; redeemed only by an exceptional
sense of melody which at its rare moments
of originality gives his poems great charm.
He was a sort of down-at-heel, Irish
Georgian-W. H. Davies with a fiddle. A
general feature of Reincarnations is the skill
with which Stephens chooses poets, and
sections of their work which are close to
his own sensibility and style. This is most
manifest in his ruthless selectiveness with
regard to Raftery, which is in itself a tacit
condemnation of the Gaelic poet's garrulity.
We can see this eclecticism at work in
his short lyric, Nancy Walsh, which is based
on Raftery's poem Nansaidh Breathnach, a
poem of forty-eight lines in six, regular,
eight-line stanzas. For a start, Stephens's
adaptation has only twenty-two short,
irregular lines. He opens his poem by
seizing on line 25 of the original which
reads,
Ta a folt ar dath an óir ag teacht go
béal a bróg,
literally,
Her hair, the colour of gold, falls to the
tops of her shoes,
which is a melodious if rather commonplace
conceit in Gaelic poetry. But there is
nothing commonplace about Stephens's
version, which is finely rhetorical:
It is not on her gown
She fears to tread;
But on her hair
Which tumbles down
And strays
About her ways.
There Stephens has his first stanza. His
second has no discernible basis in the
original, except for a general consonance
with its tone of pleasing extravagance:
And she lives nigh this place:
The dead would rise
Only to see her face:
Only to hear her sing...
Stephens's third stanza goes back to line
six of the original for its runway:
Threigfinn bean a's clann a stór da
ngluaistheá liom go h-Iorras,
literally:
I would forsake wife and family if you
would come with me to Erris.
And the translation given by Stephens:
We would leave behind
Both wife and child,
And house and home;
And wander blind,
And wander thus,
And ever roam,
If she would come to us
In Erris.
And finally the last three lines of the poem
which transfer us to a soft intimate whisper,
come directly from lines nine and ten of
the originals:
Labhair sí liom go tláith, sé dúirt sí,
'a mhíle grádh
Bíodh foighid agat go dtagaidh an oíche,
is éalóchad leat,
which he renders with unusual fidelity:
Softly she said to me
-Be patient till the night comes
And I will go with thee.
So, in all, Stephens based his twenty-two-line
poem upon five lines of the original
forty-eight. The result, of course, could
not be called a translation, it is a new poem.
It does not come up to the original in
verbal music-even to make the attempt
would have been foolish. It surpasses the
original in that it has none of its diffuseness,
its inert words and phrases, while saying
the same things. For it does say the same
things, not in the same manner, but in the
same spirit.
Most of these inspirational gleanings
from Raftery are love poems, and they
follow the method of adaptation which has
been exposed in Nancy Walsh, with the
single exception of The County of Mayo,
which is a close translation. For instance,
that beautiful lyric flight, Mary Hynes, was
begotten on a few phrases from Raftery' s
poem of forty-eight lines, Maire Ní Eidhin.
Here, for the sake of conciseness are the
phrases:
lines seventeen and eighteen:
Is aoibhinn aerach ar thaoibh an tsléibhe
Agus tú ag feachaint ar Bhail Uí Liagh,
literally,
It is pleasant and airy on the mountainside,
When you are looking towards Ballylea.
Line twenty-two, which contains the
phrase bláth na gcraobh-literally the flower
of the branches; and, finally, line twenty-four:
Sí spéir na gréine agus grádh mo chroí,
literally,
She is the sky of the sun and the love of
my heart.
These are the materials from which Stephens
builds his love poem. It is a poem of very
rare quality; Gogarty named it "one of the
lightest and loveliest lyrics I know". What
seems to me to be most remarkable in it
is a direct ingenuous quality, rarely found
in English poetry-even in the love songs
of Burns which come closest to it. This
quality can be accounted for only by
reference to the Gaelic timbre of the
original. Here it is in full:
She is the sky of the sun,
She is the dart
Of love
She is the love of my heart,
She is a rune,
She is above
The women of the race of Eve
As the sun is above the moon.
Lovely and airy the view from the hill
That looks down Ballylea;
But no good sight is good until
By great good luck you see
The Blossom of the Branches walking
towards you
Airily.
Again it is a new poem, and an unusually
fine one. Like most good lyric poetry, it
is difficult to isolat e the qualities which
made up its excellence. Gogarty tries to
account for it in terms of the subtle interlacing
vowel sounds which are, in fact, a
remarkable feature in such a short poem.
But I feel that he is closer to the mystery
when he speaks of " liquidity of the Gaelic,
a thing hidden from most of us". Because,
despite the ruthless eclecticism of Stephens's
approach to the original, he still managed
to capture the very quintessence of Raftery's
spirit-his wayward tunefulness, his fine
soaring extravagance. This is the poem, we
feel, that Raftery would have written had
he not been blind, homeless and beggared,
without any form of criticism to guide
him, the slave of an oral tradition which
prized euphony and longwindedness above
all other qualities. In this sense Stephens
gives us the best of Raftery-what remains
after all the chaff has been cleared away.
And he does this by rejecting any phrase
of the original which will not respond to
the infusion of his own creative energy.
Thus he produces a poem throbbing with
life in every artery. It was not merely a
cold-blooded selecting of key phrases. It is
rather that Stephens steeped himself in the
poem until he had absorbed its spirit-and
then he sang from the midst of it.
In these adaptations one keeps coming
across a quality, a feel, an atmosphere,
which we have not sensed in Stephens's
earlier lyrics. Here is another love song
from Raftery, which I quote in full, this
time without any reference to the process
of translation; it is called The Coolun:
Come with me under my coat,
And we will drink our fill
Of the milk of the white goat,
Or wine if it be thy will.
And we will talk, until
Talk is a trouble too,
Out on the side of the hill;
And nothing left to do.
But an eye to look into an eye
And a hand in a hand to slip
And a sigh to answer a sigh;
And a lip to find out a lip.
What if the night be black;
Or the air on the mountain chill,
Where the goat lies down in her track,
And all but the fern is still!
Stay with me under my coat,
And we will drink our fill
Of the milk of the white goat
Out on the side of the hill.
Is it my imagination, or is there something
mysteriously Irish about this love song;
about the sombre tone which interpenetrates
the expression of tenderness? I
realize that Irish critics-especially the
movement from Thomas MacDonagh
through Daniel Corkery to Robert Farren
- has pursued the quality of Irishness to
dangerous lengths; has, perhaps, gone too
far in trying to isolate it as a literary virtue.
Still, there is a note of innate sadness,
aln1ost of despair, in that short evocation
of love on the dark hillside, which I have
found nowhere except in the folk poetry
of Connacht; a poetry which had sprung
from a depressed, agrarian ethos wherein
love could often appear as a desperate and
guilty indulgence. I realize that this is an
extren1ely subjective reaction; but is there
not a striking similarity between the mood
of this poem and say, A Oganaigh an Chuil
Cheangailte, translated so perfectly by
O'Connor under the title Lad of the Curly
Locks? It is as if Stephens, with his uncanny
sensitivity to atmosphere, had absorbed this
grievous melancholy of spirit from the
poetry in which he had currently immersed
himself
Nothing, so far, has been said of the
title of the book, Reincarnations. It, of
course, supplies the key to the poet's
whole approach. Whereas Frank O'Connor
approaches the poems as a formal translator
Stephens prefers to see them as expressions
of the personality of the poets who wrote
them. Consequently, he chooses a limited
number of poets whose condition and
mode of thought came close to his own.
The wayward lyricism of Raftery found a
sympathetic vibration in Stephens's own
sensibility. O'Rahilly, on the other hand,
with his savage resentment against an
unmerited poverty, triggered an immediate
response in the poet who had written the
angry poems of Insurrections. So when, for
instance, in The Land of Fal, he translates
the following lines from O'Rahilly, he
might just as easily be voicing his own
early complaints against society:
Why are the poor tormented? Why made
grieve
The innocent? Why are the free enslaved?
Why have the wicked peace though void of
ruth?
This fierce sense of injustice, which we have
seen expressed with far greater force in
Clann Cartie is the recurrent theme in
O'Rahilly and Ó Bruadair which Stephens
chooses to focus their personalities. Both
of these poets had been ground savagely
under the heel of history. They resemble
each other and differ from Raftery in that
they were both disinherited poets. Raftery
was as poor as either of them, but they had
known better days. It fell to them to record
one of the greatest social changes that ever
befell Ireland. Ó Bruadair recorded the
first phase, the broken world that survived
after the defeat of the Irish at the Battle of
Kinsale in l601. The Irish chieftains had
gone into exile and the whole Gaelic order
had collapsed. The poets, who had been
the intellectual aristocrats of the old order,
honoured and pampered by the nobility,
were left without patrons and with nothing
to comfort them but an outmoded skill.
Ó Bruadair stands amidst the debris of this
shattered world, glaring savagely about,
blasting his degradation with Miltonic
bitterness and indignation. O'Rahilly's
position was, if possible, worse. He belonged
to the succeeding generation (circa 1670-
1726) and was, in fact, the last great
exponent of the learned tradition of the
Irish bards. But in 1691, with the broken
Treaty of Limerick, O'Rahilly, as a young
man, saw the Gaelic society which had been
brought to its knees in Ó Bruadair's time,
trampled finally into the mud with religious
persecution and penal law. The blend of
patriotic, social, religious and personal
grievance gave his poetry an intensity
which we have already noticed. Stephens
succeeds in catching only brilliant glimpses
of his quality, because a minor poet cannot
hope for complete success in translating a
great one. And in the whole tradition of
Gaelic poetry there are only two poets for
whom greatness might be claimed -
O'Rahilly and Ó Bruadair.
But by concentrating on this central
theme of hunger and wretchedness-kindred
feelings which the translator was
well qualified to express-by repeatedly
focussing O'Rahilly's unending struggle
with the hard realities of existence, Stephens
succeeds in "reincarnating" the man, in
making him speak again from the midst
of his threadbare and haggard desolation:
Here in a distant place I hold my tongue;
I am O'Rahilly:
When I was young,
Who now am young no more,
I did not eat things picked up from the shore.
The periwinkle, and the tough dog-fish
At even-time have got into my dish!
The great, where are they now! the great
had said – 
This is not seemly, bring to him instead
That which serves his and serves our
dignity-
And that was done.
I am O'Rahilly:
Here in a distant place I hold my tongue,
Who once said all his say, when he was
young!
But there is one translation from O'Rahilly
in the book which shows another side of
his mind, and which indicates an unexpected
gentleness of spirit. It is Eileen, Diarmuid
and Teig, which is based on O'Rahilly's
magnificent elegy, Ar Bhas Thrír Cloinne
Thaidhg Uí Chróinín, where he laments the
death of three children whose father,
Tadhg Ó Cróinín, had been his benefactor.
Stephens, exercising his usual freedom of
action, ignores the first four stanzas of the
original which are taken up with formal
expressions of grief, and begins his own
poem exactly halfway down, where the
poet describes the children in a series of
linked metaphors. For the benefit of those
who read Irish, I quote the relevant stanzas
of the original along with the translation,
as it offers a fascinating study in creative
adaptation. Notice how faithfully yet
flexibly the parallel is maintained:
Trí phéarla gan teimheal ba sheimh-oilte
slíghe,
Trí reidh-choinneal greine, trí aon-ghasta
i ngníomh,
Trí deasa nar chlaoin, níor bh'aosmhar a
n-aois,
Trí reilteann i dtreithibh 's i mbreithribh
gan phuimp.
Trí teada ba bhinn, trí creachta san tír,
Trí naomh-leinbh naomhtha, thug gearsearch
do Chríost;
A dtrí mbeal, a dtrí gcroidhe, a dtrí saorchorp
fá líg,
A dtrí n-eadan ba ghleigeal ag daolaibh,
is díth!
Trí fíonúir ba chaoin, trí fíor-chlúir gan
bhaois,
Trí príomh-úbhall de chraoibh úir ba
rígheamhail i dtigheas;
Trí finn-stiúir an tíghe, nár chríon-díultuigh naoidhe,
A dtrí slim-chom a míon-ghrúidh do líon
dubhach mo chroídhe.
Trí díth liom a ndíth, trí caoi-chúis mo chaoi
Trí haoin-bhúidh an naomh-úird, trí
clí-chumhra bhí;
Gur scríob chúichi, an chill trí
gnaoi-mhúinte grinn,
A Rígh, stiúir dhot rígh-chúirt an dís úd
's an t-aon.
The first two lines of Stephens's version,
which follows, are a gesture towards the
first half of the poem which he otherwise
ignores:
Be kind unto these three, O King!
For they were fragrant-skinned, cheerful and
giving;
Three stainless pearls, three of mild
winning ways,
Three candles sending forth three pleasant
rays;
Three vines, three doves, three apples on a
bough,
Three graces in a house, three who
refused nohow
Help to the needy, three of slenderness,
Three memories for the companionless,
Three strings of music, three deep holes in
clay,
Three lovely children who loved Christ
alway,
Three mouths, three hearts, three minds
beneath a stone;
Ruin it is! three causes for a moan
That rises everywhere now they are gone:
Be kind, O King, unto this two and one.
Unembarrassed tenderness is one of the
most difficult feelings to sustain in poetry
and it is a feeling which has seldom enough
been achieved. It entails walking the tightrope
over the sweet slough of sentimentality.
Stephens is sometimes guilty of
sentimentality, but not in this exquisite
elegy. The note of genuine grief for these
children who had died two hundred years
before comes across as authentically as in
O'Rahilly's original. And while he makes
no attempt to parallel O'Rahilly's verbal
cadences, he still achieves a superb sound
texture; in the dissonantal correspondences
of the first four lines, for instance, the
unobtrusive echoes of "kind", "king",
"skinned", "giving", "mild", "winning".
Again in the interweaving assonances of
"fragrant”, “stainless”, “ways”, and “rays”,
counter-pointed against their appropriate
dissonances in "pearls", "candles" and
"pleasant". Consider, finally, the hidden
contribution of the alliterative echoes
throughout, on and off the stressed syllables.
This delicacy of verbal texture winds its
way through the entire poem; any line one
chooses has its own felicity:
Help to the needy, three of slenderness.
What an extraordinary variation he got
here on a single vowel. In this poem,
perhaps, he comes closest to the general
assonantal and alliterative manner of Gaelic
poetry, what Thomas MacDonagh and
Robert Farren would call "the Irish mode".
However, I believe that this gentle orchestration
was employed here to meet a specific
technical exigency. It is this: the poem is a
rosary of associated metaphors; they are
beautiful in themselves, but a means had to
be found to hold them together, to prevent
them breaking up into independent fragments.
So Stephens employs this serpentine
pattern of sonal harmonies as his unifying
agent. As a result the poem's organic unity
is never in question; and, simultaneously,
it gains an astonishing verbal music-a
quality best revealed in the poet's own
recorded reading of it, which, fortunately,
is still extant.
But the great triumph of Reincarnations
is the group of nine poems based on the
work of David Ó Bruadair - I have
already mentioned his historical situation;
he died in 1697 having lived through most
of the seventeenth century, having seen
the Gaelic order crumble after Kinsale and
the country devastated by the Cromwellian
and Williamite wars. In a note at the end
of the volume, Stephens writes with
unnecessary self-denigration:
"It would therefore be a mistake to
consider that these poems are representative
of the poets by whom they are
inspired. In the case of David Ó Bruadair
this is less true than in any of the others,
but, even in his case, although I have
often conveyed his matter verbatim, the
selection is not representative of the poet.
One side only and that the least, is shown,
for a greater pen than mine would be
necessary if that tornado of rage, eloquence
and humour were to be presented; but
the poems which I give might almost be
taken as translations of one side of his
terrific muse"'
The side of Ó Bruadair which he chooses
is the fierce anger with which he complains
against his social degradation and against
the new ignorant English aristocracy, the
"spawn of base mechanics", who have no
regard for his poetry. At the end of his
note, Stephens writes very truly of him:
"Ó Bruadair lets out of him an unending
rebellious bawl which would be the
most desolating utterance ever made by
man if it was not also the most gleeful."
Here is a translation, and an extremely
close one, of one of Ó Bruadair's more
unceremonious satires; it may not be great
poetry, but it certainly deserves a place in
comic literature. The luckless poet has sunk
so low that he is forced to court the
patronage of a barmaid:
The lanky hank of a she in the inn over
there
Nearly killed me for asking the loan of a
glass of beer:
May the devil grip the whey-faced slut by
the hair,
And beat bad manners out of her skin
for a year.
That parboiled imp, with the hardest jaw
you will see
On virtue's path, and a voice that would
rasp the dead,
Came roaring and raging the minute she
looked at me,
And threw me out of the house on the
back of my head!
If I asked her master he'd give me a cask a
day;
But she, with the beer at hand, not a
gill would arrange!
May she marry a ghost and bear him a
kitten, and may
The High King of Glory permit her to
get the mange.
It would be tiresome to continue giving the
Irish versions of every poem discussed and,
ultimately, the translations must stand or
fall by their success as independent poems
in English. But for the sake of curiosity,
here is how the editor, Father McErlean,
S.J., renders the first line in his parallel
translation:
Once an insolent, vindictive, lank and
shrivelled girl.
Compare that to the rhythmic snap and
snarl of Stephens's "lanky hank of a she"
and you see at once the difference between
scholarly rendering and creative translation,
or "reincarnation" .
The result, as I have said, is not great
poetry. It is somewhere on the borders
between satire and lampoon, being perhaps
saved from the latter classification by the
energy and accuracy of its language. It
represents a type of spirited abuse scarcely
practised by the English poets at all, but in
Ireland it has had a long and distinguished
history. It was there in the old bardic
literature, at hand to assault a stingy patron,
it was there after the collapse of Kinsale
and the betrayal of Limerick, wielded by
O'Rahilly and Ó Bruadair; in Swift it
found perhaps its first English-speaking
exponent. It flowered during the depressed
period of the nineteenth century when it
found an ideal target in the landlord class;
and it came over without effort into the
English poetry of the revival. We have
seen it in Stephens, but it is also well
exemplified in pieces like Synge's lines on
the sister of his enemy who attacked the
Playboy; in Yeats's epigram on his imitators
or on the would-be patron of the Municipal
Gallery ; and it appears perhaps strongest of
all in Austin Clarke's recent anti-clerical
satires and Patrick Kavanagh's lively exorcisms
in The Paddiad. In fact, when a few
years ago, W. H. Auden praised Yeats for
having revived the practice of occasional
poetry in English, he was really praising
him for having perfected himself in a craft
that never died in Ireland, the craft of
occasional satire. Both Ó Bruadair' s original
and Stephens's translation are notable
products of that craft.
The theme of poetic patronage is the
predominant one in these poems, and
Ó Bruadair, because he had been robbed
of it, sounds the theme with sustained
bitterness. There is sore ten1ptation here to
quote interminably and replace criticism
with anthology, because these nine poems
constitute a masterly feat of reincarnation.
We hear Ó Bruadair mutter with smouldering
truculence as the tax-man seizes his bed,
To pay the hearth-rate that is overdue,
Pray piously,
That I may see our princes back in power,
And see Odell, the tax-collector, hung.
We hear him apologise gracefully for
having got too rowdy when entertained
at the house of one of his rare benefactors,
arguing:
Because I am a poet and incline
By nature and by art to jollity.
We listen in on his argument with a
weaver where he refuses to pay for a shirt
because he hasn't the money-and to hell
with it; we hear him refuse to return a
cloak to a Geraldine lady on the grounds
that she had made him a present of it. And
our ears ring with the stridency of his
abuse as he lambastes the new ascendancy:
"the slime that swills their veins", the race
that "was hatched by foreign vulgarity
under a hedge"; the unfortunate "slack-jawed"
planter whose genealogy he calls
out ceremoniously as,
... lout, son of lout, by old lout, and was
da to a lout.
As Stephens affirmed, the glee was always
there in the midst of Ó Bruadair's wretchedness.
What is most admirable is that we see
Stephens again take a firm hold on living
language. The hard earthy idiom which we
applauded and feared for in Insurrections is
back, and it is wielded with a new strength,
a fresh flexibility. The Weavers, already
referred to in passing, is a good example;
I quote the later, revised version published
in his Collected Poems:
Many a time your father gave me aid
When I was down-and now I'm down
again!
You mustn't take it bad, nor be dismayed
To know that youngsters ought to help
old men,
And 'tis their duty to do that: Amen!
I have no cows, no sheep, no boots, no
Hat – 
The folk who gave me presents are all
dead,
All, all good luck died with them!
Because of that
I won't pay what I owe you; but instead
I'll owe you till the dead rise from the
dead.
You weave good shirts, and I weave for my
bread
Good poetry-But you get paid at times!
The only rap I get is on my head:
But when it comes again that men like
rhymes
-And pay for them-I'll pay you for
your shirt!
The age-old problem of artist and patron
is stripped down to its naked essentials in
poems like this. No poet that I have read
in any language puts the artist's case with
such stubborn moral conviction as Ó
Bruadair. His rightful patrons, the Gaelic
chieftains, have failed him, but he is still
an artist and the society which remains, the
weavers, the inn-keepers, the barmaids,
must accept him as their responsibility.
In another of his poems he laments the
fact that he had had to vulgarise his muse
to suit their untrained ear. His contempt
for them-after all he is an aristocrat and
they mere rabble-and for his condition is
summed up in the paradoxical term with
which he describes his new poetry: sráid-éigse,
i.e., learned poetry of the street. It
would be mistaken to conclude from the
humour which often accompanies his
bitterness that the bitterness is not real. He
carries his rejection like an open wound;
and with a valiancy which never for an
instant lapses into self-pity he refuses to
compromise, asserting to the end the
sacred nature of his calling. And in his last
rancorous verses to the men of Ireland,
battered and degraded, he holds stubbornly
to his position. Stephens calls this poem
Ó Bruadair; it is one of his most perfect
translations and the stanzas I quote are
again from the final revised version in his
Collected Poems:
I will sing no more songs! The pride of my
country I sang
Through forty long years of good rhyme,
without any avail;
And no one cared even the half of the half
of a hang
For the song or the singer-so, here is
an end to the tale!
If you say, if you think I complain, and
have not got a cause,
Let you come to me here, let you look
at the state of my hand!
Let you say if a goose-quill has calloused
these horny old paws,
Or the spade that I grip on, and dig
with, out there in the land?
I had hoped to live decent, when Ireland
was quit of her care,
As a poet or steward, perhaps, in a
house of degree,
But my end of the tale is-old brogues and
old breeches to wear!
So I'll sing no more songs for the men
that care nothing for me.
From one point of view Ó Bruadair was an
extreme conservative; Frank O'Connor has
written of him in Kings, Lords and Commons
that
"His thought is so much of the old
dead world that it is as if a veil had
fallen between him and reality."
But from another point of view he was the
first of the moderns. His own integrity and
his historical situation forced him to ask
all the important questions about the
artist's relationship to his society; questions
which have continued to engage the
thought of writers everywhere, and, in
particular, the writers of his own country.
He was the first outsider; for him, too,
Ireland was, in a sense, ''the old sow who
ate her farrow". And when Joyce made his
act of renunciation generations later, he was
unconsciously adding exile and cunning to
the massive silence of Ó Bruadair's last
manifesto. Stephens sensed this universal
quality in Ó Bruadair's work and translated
it with astonishing success into modern
terms. Not only did he translate the great
Gaelic poet with supreme fidelity but
frequently he achieved in English an
almost commensurate greatness. And before
closing the book on these space-consuming
translations, I shall quote one final poem,
where I suggest this greatness has been, for
a moment, finally captured. I don't think
that even the mature Yeats would have
disowned it. It is called Skim-Milk, and is
an address to a potential patron which
catches at once the raw physical suffering
of the declassé poet and the spiritual
dignity which underlay it: the remembered
graciousness of a past age.
A small part of my grief only I write;
And if I do not publish all the tale
It is because my gloom gets some respite
By just a small bewailing: I bewail
That a poet must with stupid folk abide
Who steal his food and ruin his inside.
Once I had books, each book beyond
Compare,
And now no book at all is left to me;
Now I am spied and peeped at everywhere;
And this old head, stuffed with Latinity,
Rich with the poet's store of grave and gay,
Will not get me skim-milk for half a day.
A horse, a mule, an ass-no beast have I!
Into the forest day by day I go,
And trot beneath a load of wood, that high!
Which raises on my poor old back a row
Of red, raw blisters till I cry-Alack!
The rider that rides me will break my back!
When he was old and worn, and near his
end,
The Poet met Saint Patrick, and was
stayed;
I am a poet too, and seek a friend;
A prop, a staff, a comforter, an aid;
A Patrick to lift Ossian from despair,
In Cormac Uasail Mac Donagh of the
Golden Hair!
Any acquaintance with the old bardic
eulogies is sufficient to convince one how
absolutely right the tone, movement and
diction of that last stanza are. The switch
from the hard realism of the opening
stanzas to the grace and dignity of the last
shows how firmly Stephens has mastered
the two manners which had hitherto been
struggling in separate compartments of his
mind-because even in the early stanzas of
the poem he is playing one manner off
against the other in preparation for the lift
at the end. It will be seen on scrutiny that
the first stanza begins in mandarin fashion
and ends on a line of the most racy
colloquialism. In the last two lines of the
second stanza the same tension is employed;
an elegant and euphonious line,
Rich with the poet's store of grave and gay
is brought up suddenly against a line of
almost aggressive homeliness,
Will not get me skim-milk for half a day.
But there is no effect of anti-climax; it is a
deliberate and necessary verbal tension
which makes the final elevation of tone
viable without destroying the effectiveness
of the sudden contrast. When the beggar
throws off his rags in the last stanza we
must be surprised, but we must not be
shocked and incredulous. By the end of the
third stanza Stephens has brought us to
precisely the stage of receptivity which he
requires.
In his note on Reincarnations, the poet
points out that two of the pieces, Geoffrey
Keating and The County of Mayo, are close
translations. Of the latter he confesses to a
sense of failure, of being "so close to
success and so far from succeeding". But
Geoffrey Keating is an outstanding success,
and its curious nature entitles it to a brief
examination. It is based on a seventeenth-century
love poem, controversially ascribed
to the priest-poet, Geoffrey Keating, and
entitled, A Bhean Lan de Stuaim. This
Gaelic poem is interesting in that it is in
the French medieval tradition of Courtly
Love which had reached Ireland with that
Norman-Irish sophisticate, Gearoid Iarla, in
the fifteenth century and which, in fact,
survived in Ireland down to the middle of
the seventeenth century in the love poetry
of Pierce Ferriter, that chieftain-poet who
could be claimed as, perhaps, the last
representative of European chivalry.
It is a subtle, intricate poem, full of
conceits, very close in spirit to the sensuous
love poetry of Keating's English contemporaries,
the Cavalier poets, Carew,
Lovelace and Suckling. In it the ageing
poet wittily repells the advances of a
manifestly attractive young woman, on the
grounds of his own physical inadequacies
which are very eloquently urged. It was
not a poem to be taken by storm but by a
cunning infiltration, and Stephens's close
rendering is masterly:
O woman full of wiliness!
Although for love of me you pine,
Withhold your hand adventurous,
It holdeth nothing, holding mine.
Look on my head, how it is grey!
My body's weakness doth appear;
My blood is chill and thin; my day
Is done, and there is nothing here.
Do not call me a foolish man,
Nor lean your lovely cheek to mine:
O slender witch, our bodies can
Not mingle now, nor any time.
So take your mouth from mine, your hand
From mine, ah, take your lips away!
Lest heat to will should ripen, and
All this be grave that should be gay.
It is this curl, a silken nest,
And this grey eye bright as the dew,
And this round, lovely, snow-white breast
That draws desire in search of you.
I would do all for you meseems,
But this, tho' this were happiness!
I shall not mingle in your dreams
0 woman full of wiliness.
Of course, his schooling in the seventeenth-century
lyric, of which we have seen
evidence in Songs from the Clay, stood him
in good stead in getting to the spirit of this
delicate and ironical love-poem. But this
feat of translation shows how splendidly
he can manage the other technique of
translation. For the sake of comparison here
are the last two stanzas of the original:
Do chul craobhach chas
Do rosc glas mar dhrucht
Do chíoch chruinn gheal bhláith
Tharraingeas mian sul.
Gach gníomh acht gníomh cuirp,
Is luíghe id chuilt shuain
Do-sheanainn dod ghradh,
A bhean lán do stuaim.
And, to complete the picture, here are
the two corresponding stanzas of Mr.
O'Connor's equally admirable rendering
of the same poem, which he entitles
Growing Old:
Your twined branching hair,
Your grey eye dew bright
Your rich rounded breast
Turn to lust the sight.
But for the wild bed
And the body's flame,
Woman full of wile
My love is still the same.
It will be seen that O'Connor's rendering
is closer to the syllabic metre of the original
and equally close to the thought sequence.
It is necessarily a matter of opinion as to
which of the two versions is closer to its
spirit.
Reincarnations has been, for Stephens, a
most salutary poetic experience. The world-weary
poet who had returned from Paris
in despair for his muse, who said goodbye
to poetry in the wan verses of Autumn
1915 regains his hold on the primitive
realities of life by contact with those
ragged Gaelic poets who were so committed
to the problem of survival. He had
been in an ivory tower and the air had
become stale and enervating. But his tower
is rudely thrown down by the trumpetings
of O'Rahilly and Ó Bruadair who had
been even more savagely evicted from their
rarified bardic cloisters. Through them he
renews his contact with the clay; not the
bucolic clay of his Georgian lyrics, but the
mud that clings to the feet and squelches
through broken boots. His language has
been renewed: in its moments of elegance
there is a new grace and suppleness; and
in its areas of earthy realism there is a
greater control, a fresh organic toughness.
The whiplash of satire cracks with a more
devastating accuracy. His laughter is no
longer the coy tinkle of whimsy but the
full-blooded laugh of genuine humour.
Anything he writes after Reincarnations is
bound to be richer. But it would be wrong
to see the book solely as a step in his
artistic re-orientation. It must be seen
primarily as an outstanding volume of
poems, the high point of his poetic career,
the one book of poetry which finds him
kicking his heels on the threshold of
greatness.
