Thomas Ashe was the seventh of a
family of ten children born to
Gregory Ashe and Ellen Hanafin.
His birthplace is three miles from Dingle,
in the picturesque townland of Kinard,
set lofty on a shoulder of mountain from
which to seaward is a view of the Atlantic
Ocean and the dramatic headlands of
west Kerry. On the land side a bowlshaped
valley spreads out beneath, splashed
with colour, patterned with small fields
and little villages. All round is the bold
architecture of the hills, backed towards the
north by the great mole of Mount Brandon.
Thomas Ashe was born in 1885 into an
Ireland in the throes of the land revolution.
An aggressive national movement under
Parnell's leadership was getting results.
From the United States came funds and
other invaluable support from John Devoy
and Patrick Ford. From there, too, came
small bands of formidable men, impatient
of constitutional ways, who pelted London
and Glasgow with dynamite bombs. They,
an advance guard of revolution, included
one Henry Hammond Wilson, sentenced
in 1883 to penal servitude for life. His
real name was Thomas Clarke. He was
already a generation old at Thomas Ashe' s
birth. A generation more and their paths
would converge dramatically.
Tomas attended Ardamore National
School, passed successfully through the
various classes and in l900 began his term
as monitor which ran for five years. At the
end of the third year he secured the Reid
Prize and at the end of his fifth year repeated
the success, the certificate in evidence of
which, dated 7 December, 1905, is on view
in the Dingle Library. That same year he
was appointed assistant organiser under the
Gaelic League for the period Easter to
September.
The Gaelic League attracted the most
brilliant minds in Ireland and Ashe, like
Pearse, was profoundly inspired by it.
His Gaelic League work occupied his
evenings and weekends. He took an active
part in promoting the Dingle Feis and
wrote a play, An Puncan (The Yank),
a comedy on the popular theme of the
returned American, which he produced at
the Feis. A local professional man who was
an ardent supporter of the Gaelic League
was so impressed by the play that he took
the entire cast to Tralee where they gave
an open-air performance at the Tralee
Feis. The setting was in the Town Park
where unusual lighting effects were provided
by a plentiful supply of torchlights.
On their way to the Park Tomas with his
company of players marched through the
streets, carrying the costumes and stage
properties, led by Brian O'Donovan of
Carbery playing the bagpipes. The crowds
followed.
Under the stimulus of the Gaelic League
Tomás read every available printed text
in Irish literature and his studies ranged
through folklore, history, hagiography and
Thomas Ashe in his piper's uniform.
Old Irish Laws. It was primarily through
his father's influence that he devoted his
talents to the collection of Irish airs and
songs. So great was his interest in this branch
of study that it is probable, had he been
given a normal span of life, that Thomas
Ashe might have attained the eminence in
this field of a P. W. Joyce or a Henry
Hudson. Some of his favourite reading
related to the achievements of great military
leaders, like Napoleon, and he studied the
campaigns of the American Civil War with
special admiration for the exploits of
Stonewall Jackson. He would speculate on
the outcome of an encounter between Owen
Roe O'Neill and Cromwell. His heart went
out to those who fought heroically against
desperate odds and he had particular
affection for Peter O'Neill Crowley,
Michael Dwyer, Robert Emmet and Pierce
Ferriter. Greatest of all Irishmen for Tomas
was Wolfe Tone, who designed the ideal
of a united, egalitarian Irish Republic.
Despite his great interest in reading and
other studies, Tomas was very much an
out-of-doors man. There was hard work
to be done on the Kinard farm, and by
the time he was sixteen he had acquired
a man's physique and the capacity for any
manly task. He enjoyed all games of
strength and agility, football, weight throwing,
swimming, rowing, long and high
jump and wrestling. He loved the day-long
tramps over moorland and heather, fowling
piece on shoulder, taking in his stride
trenches, hedges and streams, so that to
keep up with him was an endurance test.
Apart from his joyous exhilaration in the
open-air life, he had a conscious motive
in those long, arduous tramps. The stamina
and endurance they gave was part of a
soldier's training. From early youth Thomas
Ashe saw himself in the role of a soldier of
Ireland.
II
He entered De La Salle Training College,
Waterford, in 1905, at the age of twenty,
to commence his two-year course in
training as a national teacher. Shortly after
qualifying he obtained the position of
principal in Corduff national school in
Lusk, County Dublin. There he took up
duty on 16 March, 1908, and taught,
except for a six-month period in America,
until 19 April, 1916, a period of some eight
years. [note: Dates supplied by courtesy of the Department of Education.] For Thomas Ashe they were intense,
creative, golden years.
Thomas Ashe represented the acme of
manly grace and perfection. Over six
feet tall, strong and handsome, he possessed
the kind of form a Praxiteles might love
to mould. The West Kerry Ashes were
men of noted physique. The distinguished
Hollywood actor, Gregory Peck, is stated
to be by authentic genealogy an Ashe of
Kinard. In the homesteads of his native
Corcaguiney, as well as in the modest
cottages of North County Dublin, there is
no more prized possession than something
that keeps Tom Ashe in memory, an old
postcard perhaps, or photograph or even
faded newspaper print, showing him in
kilts, with his mop of chestnut hair, his
classical perfection of cow1tenance, his
lithe and magnificent figure. Underneath
you might read a patriotic phrase, most
likely and most favoured "Ireland Gaelic
and Free". Where he lived and laboured,
the memory of Thomas Ashe is cherished
with a devotion given to no other mortal
man.
The pupils he taught at school in Corduff
idolised him. "He was a good teacher who
was not a cross teacher," said one former
pupil, and what better answer is there to a
schoolchild's prayer. "He was the most
outstanding teacher I ever met", recalls
Thomas J. Brangan. "He had such a way
of putting things that you took them in and
absorbed them without any feeling of
having them forced on you. Mr. Ashe
did not believe in using the rod. He was
very much liked by his pupils. When he
returned from America in 1914 the kids
at school went wild with delight. He taught
us all the Fenian and rebel songs which, of
course, were not on the programme. First
he would note down the airs for us in
tonic solfa. Then he would teach us the
words."
Another pupil recalls that amongst the
distinguished visitors who called to see him
at the school at various periods were
Claude Chavasse, Francis J. Biggar, Senor
William Bulfin and Roger Casement. The
names are significant, for they link with
the various national interests in which
Tomas was immersed. The men and
women of Fingal who as children attended
Thomas Ashe's school remember him with
pride. They are not affluent, but their
memories have become enriched by contact
with him in a way they would not exchange
for all the wealth of the world.
III
The late Volunteer Joe Kelly of Lusk, who
with his two brothers fought under Thomas
Ashe in 1916, will tell you that Ashe swore
him into the Irish Republican Brotherhood
in l9l3. The fact brings us face to face
with the primary purpose of Thomas Ashe's
life, the freedom of Ireland through armed
insurrection. The Irish Volunteers were
founded in November of that year on the
initiative of the I.R.B. Early in 1914
Tomas went to America, returning in
September with £l,000 collected for
Volunteer purposes. [note: Nat. Library. MS. No. II,123. Notes by Diarmuid Lynch; copied by kind permission of Major Florence O'Donoghue.] Following John
Redmond's Woodenbridge address on
20 September, 1914, the Volunteers in
Fingal, as elsewhere, divided, with the
result that a small, compact group, centering
mainly in Lusk and Swords, remained
loyal to the original ideal of giving their
service to Ireland within her own shores.
Constant attention to drill and manoeuvres
produced a thoroughly trained
group of fighting men. They gave their
devoted loyalty to Thomas Ashe, whose
very presence inspired their morale and
their confidence. Early in 1915 he was
elected Commandant of the Fingal Volunteers.
Already he had made a special study
of North County terrain and its possibilities
for military operations, and worked out detailed
plans for the area, which he put on
paper. They were submitted to Joseph
Plunkett at a meeting of the Volunteer
Executive in February 1915.
All the time he worked hard teaching
school and, in the evenings, there was music,
song and discussion with friends at his
nearby residence, where thought and mind
were free and the rights of man found ready
acclaim. Tomas was a loyal friend and
supporter of Jim Larkin in the l9l3 battle,
as he was the friend and companion of
Sean O'Casey on many a quayside ramble,
with Micheal O Foghlu and others for
company. To Fingal he brought the colour
and romance of the Black Raven Pipers
Band which, with its great Viking-pattern
banner streaming in the wind, became a
feature of national hastings in the North
County. Athletics, drama, painting, local
and national history, all commanded his
attention. In a list of rebel suspects given by
the police to Sir Matthew Nathan of Dublin
Castle he was identified as "Gaelic
Leaguer." [note: Leon Ó Broin: Dublin Castle and the 1916 Rising, p. 23.] With his numerous interests,
most of all the Volunteers, there were
frequent comings and goings on his motor
cycle, at all hours of the day and night, to
the mystification of his good housekeeper
Mrs. Thornton, who kept the house and
hedges trim and neat and would wonder
what on earth Mr. Ashe was up to now.
''Boys, oh, boys, he never told me he was
going" was her repeated lament as she
looked back on the Monday of Easter
Week, when Mr. Ashe disappeared for the
last time from her ken.
Few people can have known Thomas
Ashe as well as his assistant teacher in
Corduff School for seven years, Miss Mary
Monks. Only later did she realise the full
meaning of what he said and did on his
last day at school. She recalled the occasion
to the writer:
"After discussing the possibility of a
fight for freedom he remarked: Should
the fight begin on Good Friday, we will
surely win, for we will have Brian Boru
with us! He then cut all the flowers in
bloom in the school garden, placed
them in my arms with a request that they
should be put on the altar, in front of the
Blessed Sacrament, on the following day
-Holy Thursday, 1916."
That weekend Tomas received his instructions
for action from James Connolly.
Connolly was Commander for the Dublin
area of the Republican forces and Ashe,
serving under him, could have asked for
no superior closer to this own sympathies.
To Ashe the opportunity of rising in arms
for Ireland was ''an honour only few
generations, and only choice generations,
of the people of Ireland" received. [note: Oration at Casement's Fort, p. 5.] The
campaign of the Fingal Battalion during
Easter Week, culminating in the victory of
Ashbourne, proved Thomas Ashe to be
one of the outstanding military leaders of
the Rising and his fifth battalion a superbly
trained unit of fighting men. Their campaign
set the pattern for the future guerilla
war.
For his part in the Rising Thomas Ashe
was tried by courtmartial. One of the first
questions asked him was "What hope did
you think you had of defeating the British
Empire?" to which he gave the answer:
"A soldier does not question the difficulties
he has to face." He was sentenced to death,
a finale on which he looked with absolute
serenity. His sentence was commuted on
11 May to penal servitude for life. He was
probably saved only by the rising public
feeling against the executions. He said he
was sorry he was not shot as never again
would he be spiritually so well prepared.
From an English prison he wrote to a friend :
"I am sure you would like to hear
from me about Easter Week but I am
sorry to say that that is a closed book
to me while here but I may be allowed
to say that few can tell as much of its
beauties as I. Its religious effect on us all
is the one most in evidence here.''
In the letter Tomas goes on to refer to
"the happiness I felt while awaiting the
sentence of death in Kilmainham Prison.
It was a beautiful experience."
In Lewes Prison he wrote an uncompleted
novel dealing with the country ways and
life of Moynalty and its social problems.
In Lewes also he wrote his poem, Let Me
Carry Your Cross for Ireland, Lord, which
reveals his patriotic credo with the stark
and primal intensity of the Psalmist.
Arthur Griffith has written of Thomas
Ashe:
"Long we knew Thomas Ashe as a
pioneer of Irish Ireland. No month passed
for years in which he did not come to
discuss and try to plan ways and means
with us for reviving that language which
was his own and he kept, which is our
own, and we have lost. In Lewes Prison,
his comrades tell us, he kept up the same
enthusiasm, and spent the recreation
hours instructing fellow-prisoners in
their own tongue". [note: Nationality October 6, 1917.]
Tomas served periods in Dartmoor,
Lewes, Portland, and for a very brief
period in Pentonville, before being released
in the amnesty of June 17, 1917. Although
he was the released prisoners' first choice
for nomination to the parliamentary
vacancy that occurred in East Clare, he
declined to stand. He enjoyed only two
months of freedom before his re-arrest on
18 August. Into that brief period he
crowded many events, including the only
journey he was able to make home to
Kinard and Dingle, the Clare election
campaign in support of de Valera, the
Oireachtas festival at Waterford, the Casement
Anniversary oration at Ardfert (a
notable speech this), and many other public
appearances in support of the campaign for
a republic. One of his speeches, made at
Ballinalee, Co. Longford, on 25 July, led
to the issue of a warrant (the date of which
is uncertain) for his arrest on the charge of
inciting disaffection amongst the civil
population. For weeks Tomas was compelled
to go on the run from the Castle
detectives and he used mainly the safe
refuge of Batt O'Connor's house in Donnybrook
into which that expert craftsman
had built a concealed room.
On the evening of 18 August, having
occasion to go into the city centre, he was
recognised by two detectives near Nelson's
Pillar and arrested. At a courtmartial in the
Lower Castle Yard on 3 September, he
was sentenced to two years hard labour with
remission of one year, a Draconian sentence
in the circumstances. The evidence against
him was defective by any rules. It consisted
of a confused mental recollection by two
constables of what they alleged he said.
Tomas's own opinion was that he would
have gone free had he used a lawyer in his
defence.
In Mountjoy Jail, where he was confined,
he found his friends Austin Stack and Fionan
Lynch, who had already been sentenced to
hard labour, and some forty other Sinn
Fein prisoners, including Joe MacDonagh,
brother of the executed 1916 leader. They
were all placed by the prison authorities
on the same level as common thieves or
burglars and given precisely identical
treatment. This classification they refused
to accept. Since l848 it had been official
British policy to degrade Irish political
prisoners. The fierce personal protest of
O'Donovan Rossa forms one of the stirring
chapters which marked the resentment this
kind of treatment aroused. Thomas Ashe
and his comrades made it clear that they
were not particular what sort of treatment
they received so long as they were not
classed as criminals. In the words of Tim
Healy: "Mr. Ashe and the other prisoners
claimed no luxuries, they claimed no conveniences,
but they were claiming a status
-the status of non-criminals".
Their request for political treatment was
rejected by the acting-governor of Mountjoy.
The prisoners accordingly decided,
unless their request were granted, to go on
hunger strike on l October. Meanwhile
they declined to do any tasks allotted to
criminals, such as sewing mailbags, or to
observe the silence rule during exercise.
The aggressive manner in which the
Mountjoy authorities thereafter treated
them compelled them to go on hunger
strike on 20 September. The acting-governor
claimed that the prisoners
"mutinied", but examination proved that
the prisoners' hunger strike was provoked
by illegal acts committed against them by
the prison authorities.
Stated briefly, what happened in Mountjoy
Prison was-
I. On Monday, 17 September, a request
was made by the Defence of the
Realm prisoners for political treatment.
It was rejected.
2. On the following Wednesday afternoon
they were deprived of exercise.
They rang their bells and demanded it.
The bells were muffled. The prisoners
were transferred to another wing.
3. On Thursday morning 20 September,
they were deprived of exercise. In
protest they rang bells, hammered
doors, shouted and raised a commotion
(There were some who did not).
4. Their bedclothes, bedding, boots and
cell effects were taken away, a process
in which force was used and assault
committed on them.
5. Thereupon the alleged "mutiny", i.e.
hunger strike, began.
At the inquest on Thomas Ashe this
sequence of events was established to be
the correct one.
That Thursday morning Thomas Ashe
did nothing to invite the treatment inflicted
on him. The acting-governor could
not point to a single article broken or
damaged by him. Four warders removed
his bed and bedding and then tried to take
away his boots. These were his own
property and he resisted, but after a fierce
struggle they were removed off his feet.
For the next fifty hours he lay in his cell,
absorbing into his body the chills from the
bare floor and walls. On Saturday morning
an unexpected and dramatic intervention
by the Lord Mayor of Dublin caught the
prison authorities off guard. The Lord
Mayor described what he saw in Mountjoy
as ''something alarming''. The prisoners'
beds were restored as soon as he left.
The prisoners were then subjected to
forcible feeding, a process in which food
was pumped into the stomach with a
mechanical device while the prisoner sat
in a chair to which he was bound hands
and feet.
Thomas Ashe had been forcibly fed three
times when the Lord Mayor came to
Mountjoy again and saw him on the
morning of Monday, 24 September. The
Lord Mayor tried to persuade him out of
the hunger strike. Thomas Ashe's resolve
was unbreakable: "No. They have branded
me as a criminal. Even though I do die, I die
in a good cause."
On the following morning he was
forcibly fed for the last time. The operation
was unskilfully administered by an assistant
doctor and the food was forced into his
lungs. He collapsed in the chair and was
removed to the prison hospital. It became
obvious to the authorities that he was dying
and they decided to send him outside to die.
Shortly after 5 p.m. he was transferred by
ambulance to the Mater Hospital.
Amongst his last visitors were Fathers
Albert and Augustine of the Capuchin
Order. They sat by his bedside for about
five minutes. They asked him how he was
and he told them:
"I was splendid this morning until
forcibly fed. The forcible feeding upset
me completely."
Before they left Tomas said to them "We
made a great fight".
Father Augustine spoke to him in Irish
the words of comfort that have been heard
from time immemorial by the Gaeltacht
fireside: "God is good and He has a good
Mother". Tomas replied "Yes, indeed,
Father". These were about the last words
he uttered. He died at 10.30 p.m. that night.
having received the last Rites of the Church
from Father Murray.
At the end of a prolonged inquest, which
opened on 27 September and continued,
with intermissions, until 1 November the
seventeen-man jury returned, unanimously,
a verdict censuring the inhuman and
barbarous treatment inflicted on Thomas
Ashe by which his death was caused. In all
but words they indicted the Prisons Board
of his murder. Their verdict struck a mortal
blow at the Castle administration.
Thomas Ashe's remains were removed to
the Pro-Cathedral, where Solemn Requiem
Mass was celebrated for the repose of his
soul, and from there to the City Hall to lie
in state until taken for burial to Glasnevin
on Sunday, 30 September, 1917. His funeral
provided an impressive demonstration of
the affection and respect in which he was
held throughout Ireland. People travelled
to Dublin from all parts of the country to
attend it. His Grace the Archbishop of
Dublin, The Most Reverend Patrick Walsh,
D.D., whose nationalist views were well-known,
joined in the tribute by sending his
motor-car to the funeral. About two
hundred priests, ranging from the very
young to the very old and representing all
parts of Ireland, walked immediately ahead
of the hearse, a remarkable testimony to the
deep religious faith and integrity of the dead
patriot. Contemporary press reports said
the funeral was as great as Parnell's or
greater [note: e.g., Irish Independent and Irish Times, l October, 1917.] and spoke of its military splendour
and precision. [note: Freeman's Journal, l October, 1917.] The immense procession,
which was marshalled by the Irish Volunteers,
was dignified, orderly and reverent.
It was a tribute, charged with deep emotion,
to the dead man. It set the seal of the nation's
approval on the cause for which he stood
and for which he had died. Black Maxwell's
deeds were remembered anew and this latest
act of the administration served by Maxwell
aroused the most robust feelings of protest
and resistance. The young men of Ireland
who came to Dublin to march behind the
coffin and saw their strength and sensed
the meaning of that hushed September
afternoon returned to the remotest parts
of Ireland with minds steeled by their
experience. The death of Thomas Ashe
was an overt and major act of hostility to
the Irish Republican cause. The treatment
which resulted in death for the victor of
Ashbourne produced a temper which
hardened into the national resistance of
1919-1921. Signs of that hardening were
clear enough in the challenge uttered by
the leaders of Republican Ireland.
Speaking in the City Hall the night after
the funeral William Cosgrave said:
The last headline that he gave to
humanity was the basis of his lifetime"
My Lord Mayor, if I die it is in a good
cause". The empire of his genius, his
courage and his tenacity shall outlive
the Empire of wealth and power and
despotism which has deprived Ireland
of one of her most valiant sons. [note: Freeman's Journal, 2 October, 1917.] 
The day of the funeral, Eamon de Valera
addressed a great meeting in O'Connell
Square, Ennis, and his words have been
reported as follows:
Dreamers were they who asked them
to be loyal to the Constitution which was
responsible for Tom Ashe's death. But
he would ask them to be loyal to Ireland,
and to be true and honest to the flag that
that day was unfortunately draped for
Tom Ashe .... His death would tell
the world the spirit that was left in
Irishmen, and it would tell the world
that nothing but freedom would satisfy
the Irish people, and that they were
ready to perish, one after the other,
rather than submit to be conquered. [note: Freeman's Journal, l October, 1917.]
Most of all was the temper of Young
Ireland reflected and forecast in the speech,
of classic pith and brevity, delivered at
his graveside by his friend, Michael Collins.
Three volleys had been fired and the Last
Post sounded in tribute to the Republican
chieftain. Collins in the uniform of a Volunteer
officer stepped forward and spoke a few
words of Irish that have not been recorded.
He added:
Nothing additional remains to be said.
That volley which we have just heard
is the only speech which it is proper to
make above the grave of a dead Fenian. [note: Irish Independent, l October, 1917. See also Freeman's Journal and Cork Examiner of same date.] 
These words from Thomas Ashe's graveside
carried a message that boded no good
for the government that had encompassed
his death.
The writer wishes to make special acknowledgment to Nóra, Griaghair and Padraig Ághas for their kindness in supplying him
with materials and recollections used in the above essay; also to Rev. Bro. Bernardine, f.s.c., Miss Mary Monks, Joseph
Kelly, R.I.P., Thomas J. Brangan, Mrs. James Sheridan and Richard Kelly.
