Modern research has shown that America was discovered several times before
the voyages of Columbus in 1492. He did not arrive on a desert island. He found
the New World occupied by peoples who probably had arrived thousands of
years before in successive waves of migration from Asia by way of the Bering Strait, which
formerly belonged to Russia, and now forms part of the United States. Most parts of the
New World were inhabited before the white man appeared. The expression "red Indians"
is a misnomer because the original inhabitants did not come from India, and their skin is
more brown than red. Columbus is responsible for the term "Indians". His discovery of
America was accidental, because he really set out to find a western or shorter route to Asia,
which was then known as "the Indies".
Centuries before Columbus's memorable voyage, St. Brendan , the navigator, probably ,
and the Norsemen certainly, had discovered parts of America.
There is an interesting, but rather biassed, account of the " Indians" in an otherwise
informative book entitled A Concise Account of North America, by Major Robert Rogers,
first published in London in 1765. Later in 1770 it was published in Dublin, which was an
important publishing centre of some good books in the eighteenth century. I discovered
the book in the British Museum Library many years ago when engaged on research work
regarding the historical background of the American Revolution. It is probably unknown
to many historians, and publishers of valuable reprints. Rogers had a very adventurous and
colourful career and some data about his life are worth recording. He was born at Dunbarton
in New Hampshire in 1727 where his father was one of the first settlers. He fought
in the wars against the French in North America (1755-'60). A precipice near Lake George
is named Rogers' Range to commemorate his escape down the precipice from the Indians.
In 1759 he was deputed by Sir Jeffrey Amherst to destroy the Indian village of St. Francis
near the St. Lawrence River. His Journals, published in 1765, giving an account of his early
adventures as a ranger, were read and enjoyed by George III of England. In the same year
he was appointed governor of Michigan.
Falsely accused of intriguing with the
Spaniards, he revisited London in 1769. Later
he was promoted colonel in the British
Army in America where he raised the
"Queens Rangers". Like many others of
English extraction he returned to England
after the American Declaration of Independence, and died in London in 1800.
Rogers praised William Penn's treatment
of the Indians. He gave orders that no land
belonging to the natives of Pennsylvania
should be taken possession of until "a fair
purchase of them. from the Indians". Such
humane treatment of the native Indians
was not practised by all the other colonies
or indeed by the Spanish colonists in South
America. Rogers considered the men very
lazy and thought that they were doomed
to extinction in a century, because of
"their insatiable fondness of spirituous
liquors" (Op. cit., p. 211). He admitted,
however, that these "hale, robust and
constitutionally firm people" can "cope
with some of the evils" of human nature.
They had "remedies that seldom fail in
many disorders... particularly in the palsy,
dropsy, and the venereal disorder. They
frequently make use of cupping and phlebotomy;
but their most universal remedy
is sweating and the cold bath immediately
after it" (Op . cit., p .249) .
Rogers's prediction that the Indians
would become extinct in a century has
not been fulfilled. They have, however,
suffered very severely during the discovery
and exploration of the Western State of
America in the nineteenth century. Their
interests and mode of life were sacrificed
to the acquisitive instincts, and pioneering
spirit, of a restless and expanding white
population. Despite a belated and desperate
effort about the middle of the last century
to assert their rights to the peaceful occupation of their lands, they have gone down
to history as one of the major casual ties
of " economic progress". Their refusal or
inability to become integrated into a
ruthless dynamic economic environment
cost them millions of acres of land probably
amounting to about eighty million acres.
They were pushed into "reservations", and
the monetary compensations which they
received could never folly satisfy their
claims to justice. The Indian Reorganisation
Act passed by Congress, 18 June, 1934,
was an attempt to rehabilitate the Indian
communities. It gives them a greater sense
of security and makes greater provision for
their health and education. They enjoy full
citizenship and may vote in every state of
the Union.
The picture of the economic, educational
and religious conditions of America given
by Rogers ten years before the Revolution
is quite a feat. He stressed the religious
factor leading to emigration from England.
He emphasised the influence of religious
disputes amongst the early colonists, which
caused them. "for peace of mind to migrate
and found other colonies" (Op. cit., p. 45).
It was not until 1577 that England made
any serious attempt to claim her share of
the New World. She based her right to do
soon the rediscovery of America in 1497
by John Cabot, an Italian merchant, who
resided in Bristol for a number of years.
The fall of Constantinople in the middle of
the fifteenth century, which shut off the East
from European traders, did not make British
merchants look to the West until all hopes
of European expansion were finally abandoned
by the loss of Calais to France in
1557. From the sixteenth century onwards,
economic, but chiefly religious, reasons
led many Englishmen, particularly those of
the nonconformist and Puritan religion, to
seek abroad that freedom which they could
not enjoy at home.
In that group of colonies known as New
England the Puritans displayed those
economic virtues for which they were
noted in England, and also that rigorism.
which practically outlawed reasonable recreation. These gualities have exercised a
profound influence both for good and
evil on the American character.
Rogers's treatment of religious toleration
as practised by the colonists is more
objective than that of some later historians
who have mistaken mythology for history.
Instead of making William Penn, the
Quaker Governor of Pennsylvania, the
pioneer of religious toleration, he pointed
out that Penn merely did for Pennsylvania
what " the Roman Catholic nobleman did
for Maryland" in the reign of Queen Mary.
Lord Baltimore had an act passed
tolerating "all who professed Christianity"
(Op. cit., p. 95). An extract from the act
reads: "No person or persons whatsoever
within this province ... professing to
believe in Jesus Christ, shall henceforth
be any ways troubled, molested or discountenanced
for, or in respect, of his or
her religion, nor in the free exercise
thereof". This Toleration Act is, of course,
not quite so wide in its scope as that later
contained in the First Amendment of the
American Constitution, which states that
"Congress shall make no law respecting
the establishment of religion or prohibiting
the free exercise thereof".
By implication Rogers had disposed of
the myth, which had a long currency, that
the Puritans or Pilgrim Fathers were the
champions of religious liberty. Both G. K.
Chesterton and his brother, Cecil, maintained
that the whole Puritan movement
in America was "a struggle against religious
toleration". The records of Calvinism in
New England, wrote the late Cecil Chesterton,
"read like those of a madhouse where
religious maniacs have broken loose and
locked up their keepers" (A History of
U.S.A., London 1919, p. 6.).
How strange then that in a widely used
text-book in American schools and colleges
we find a Doctor Long asserting that "the
supreme Puritan principle was the liberty
of the individual soul before God" (History
of English Literature, Ginn & Co., New
York, p. 205.). It is difficult to reconcile
that assertion with the fact that a Puritan
government in Massachusetts banished
Quakers for following their conscience
and relying "on God and the inner spirit".
If these Quakers returned to Massachusetts,
" they were whipped for their first offence;
had their ears cut off for the second offence;
and if they persisted and returned a third
time, they were hanged". Such intolerance
does not tally with the so-called Puritan
ideal of "a free Church in a Free State".
No wonder the Quakers and others
migrated to states like Pennsylvania where
religious toleration was more of a reality.
"Quakerism", after all, as the late Monsignor
R. Knox has charitably observed,
" does but enthrone in dangerous isolation
the truth of God's presence within us"
(Enthusiasm, p. 590). American Catholics
should be grateful to the Reverend Terence
L. Connolly, S.J., and to the Paulist Press,
New York, for publishing a valuable
corrective to Long's book entitled Puritanism
in History and Literature (see pp. 8 and 9).
Historians find it difficult to avoid oversimplification
when dealing with the
tangled skein of human history whether
religious or secular. A historical hobby
horse, however, may prove stimulating
to others if not ridden to death. An eminent
non-Catholic French political scientist and
economist maintained over thirty-seven
years ago that "it is impossible to understand
the United States unless one fully
appreciates the Puritan spirit". He claimed
that the Puritans are "the spiritual descendants
of Cromwell . . . and have remained
faithful to his inflexible bigotry .. . .
The Ku Klux Klan expresses both their
prejudices and their fears" (Andre Siegfried,
America Comes of Age, English translation,
Jonathan Cape, London 1930, pp. 14, 53).
There is much truth in Siegfried's contention
both with regard to the emergence
and evolution of the United States. Despite
the modern fashion of viewing the wars of
the eighteenth century as exclusively
economic in their origin, there is good
reason for regarding the American Revolution as due also to religious and philosophical
principles. Probably most of the ministers
of religion, as well as most of the American
colonists, were afraid that England might
some day attempt to establish the Anglican
Church with its episcopacy in the colonies.
That consideration, coupled with their
adherence to the political philosophy of
John Locke, made them ready supporters
of the break with England. It is not surprising
that historians are still studying the
American Revolution and reinterpreting
the traditional interpretations of this seemingly
historical miracle. A century is a short
time in the life of a nation, and it is less
than two centuries since the Declaration
of Independence (1776) by the thirteen
British colonies. Ten years before the
Declaration of Independence, maps were
engraven which, much to the surprise of
Voltaire, referred to America as "the
Atlantic Island". That description was
probably prompted by its remoteness
from Europe; its political incoherence, and
its negligible role in European affairs.
About the middle of the eighteenth century
its population consisted of about two
n1-illions. The colonies possessed great and
varied economic resources. They had many
important industries including ship-building
but all these were only in their infancy
with regard to development.
The economic causes of the Revolution,
which some historians have over-stressed,
were, of course, vital. The differences or
disagreements amongst historians are largely
a matter of emphasis. The salient facts or
causes which precipitated the American
Revolution-it was bound to happen
sooner or later-are easily understood.
The Treaty of Paris in 1763 ended the
long war between France and England for
supremacy in North America. England's
victory seemed to English statesmen the
end of their worries, but, in reality, it
ushered in a new era in the evolution of
what is now the United States of America.
The conclusion of the war with France gave
the colonists a sense of security. They
naturally began to reflect on their right to
exist as a separate political entity with
their economic life, trade manufactures
and taxes, untrammelled by the restrictions
and interference of the British Parliament.
The colonies had been regarded as divinely
ordained to provide raw materials for the
mother country and to accept in return
manufactured goods carried in British
ships. Although these restrictions were
frequently evaded by a vast and lucrative
smuggling trade conducted by some of the
colonists, the overall effect on the economy
of the colonies was an adverse trade balance,
a shortage of hard currency, and an inflated
or depreciating paper money.
England's national debt, as a result of
the long war with France, had risen from
£70,000,000 to £130,000,000. The need
for increased taxation was urgent and
Britain felt that the colonies should share
the burden. The year 1763 might be regarded
as the beginning of the American
Revolution because it was in that year that
the British Parliament decided to raise a
revenue from the colonies. This change in
colonial policy, signalised by the passing
of the Stamp Act in 1765, accelerated the
causes making for revolt, which had been
intermittently at work for more than a
century. America, as John Adams declared,
had been "a theatre of parties and feuds
for near two hundred years" (Works,
Vol. X, p. 241).
Although the Puritan element in the
population played an important part in the
economic life of the colonies, particularly
in New England, the revolutionary and
democratic movement in America owes
less to the minute regulations of the New
England theocracies than to the Middle
and Southern colonies. Like all great
historical innovations, the movement for
independence owed as much, if not more, to
practical exigencies than to formal theorizing.
When the Virginia Convention, (12
June, 1776), however, declared that all
men, having a permanent interest in the
community, "cannot be taxed or deprived
of their property for public uses, without
their own consent, or that of their representatives",
it was converting into a text
for the American Revolution a doctrine
which occurs in the pamphlet literature of
seventeenth-century England, and found
formal expression in John Locke's Civil
Government. One might truly say that
George III of England was the Charles I
of America.
The Stamp Act imposed stamp duties
on every "skin or piece of vellum or
parchment, or sheet or piece of paper"
used for legal documents, academic degrees,
liquor licences, and various commercial
instruments. It applied also to pamphlets,
newspapers, almanacs, and all advertisements.
This, indeed, was a wide tax net,
but the revenue caught by it was less than
the expense of collecting it, owing to the
determined opposition of the financial and
merchant classes.
It kindled a fire of resentment which led
to a conflagration, culminating in the
"Boston Tea Party" in 1773. This upsurge
of feeling caused the British Parliament
to repeal the Act the following year (1766),
and withdraw all duties on goods imported
by the colonies except the tax on tea which
was retained for form's sake. Parliament,
to save its face, passed another Act declaring
its right to bind the colonies by its enactments. The die was now cast. The objections
of the colonies to taxes levied by a
Parliament in which they had no representation
was far more than a protest against
economic tutelage. It marked the adolescent
stage of national self-consciousness which
matured rapidly in a few years.
Who would have foreseen in the middle
of the eighteenth century how a few million
people, with divergent economic interests,
religious beliefs, and racial backgrounds,
could unite to lay the foundations of the
great American Republic. The very diversity
of racial elements amongst the colonists,
however, when channeled into a common
purpose, proved a powerful dynamic
national force. English statesmen too lightly
assumed that America was just a convenient
outlet for "greedy appetites", convicts,
undesirables, and bankrupts, whereas many
of them were " knight adventurers" in
quest of liberty-religious, political, and
economic. The irrational optimism which
assumed that the colonies could never go it
alone suffered the disillusionment of truth
when the colonists called a Congress at
Philadelphia in 1774, leading to war in
April, 1775, and the Declaration of Independence
in 1776. This historic Declaration
was signed under a Waterford glass
chandelier, which still hangs in Independence
Hall, Philadelphia, and is a monument
to one of Ireland's great export industries
two centuries ago.
England's reluctance to believe that the
colonists could succeed explains the dilatory
policy of the heads of the army and navy
to take vigorous and decisive action at the
outbreak of hostilities. She underestimated
the determination of the colonists; their
military resourcefulness; their capacity for
co-operation, and ability to rise to heroic
heights of endurance. Thus twenty years
after England had concluded a Treaty with
France making her the dominant power
in the regions along the Atlantic border
and east of the Mississippi river, she had
to sign another Treaty in Versailles (1783),
acknowledging the independence of the
United States. This epoch-making event
spotlighted America's emergence from a
state of political and economic dependency.
It was also a portent of the great role which
the United States was destined to play, not
only in the European, but also in the world
political scene of the present century. T he
United States today is composed of fifty-one
States forming a Federal Republic.
It is more truly described as a continent
than as a country. Its material and scientific
triumphs have elicited the admiration and
envy of the world.
The more one studies the history of the
growth of the United States as a great
power, the more one is astonished by the
sagacity, ingenuity, and, one might almost
say, the sheer good luck, which enabled her
to overcome the resistances and local
jealousies that she encountered in trying to
draw up a Federal Constitution leading to
the establishment of a Federal Government
for the thirteen States of the Union. Paradoxical, as it may appear, her very difficulties proved in many ways an advantage.
Transition period
The transition from the British colonial
system to the establishment of free governments from 1776-1788, has a fascination
for this age in which the last remnants of
the old colonial system are repidly disappearing. The story could not be fully
told here. It is now recognised that the
emerging American nation had many
advantages which compare favourably with
the circumstances in which some colonies
in this century obtained their independence.
They had a fair amount of experience in
managing their own affairs on a local level.
They probably had attained as good as, if
not a better, level of education than the
ordinary people of any European country.
The truth of the situation lies somewhere
between the exaggerated praise of John
Adams and the fault-finding statements of
Major Rogers. The latter, whose book
has been already mentioned, held that in
New Hampshire the education of the
young was greatly neglected. There were
"very few schools regularly kept up, or
well supplied with masters" (pp. 59- 60).
In Rhode Island, " the garden of the colony",
the education of children was "generally
shamefully neglected" (p. 66). It is possible
that Roger did not allow for the fact
that many families in the colonies, owing
to their affluent condition, did not need
public funds or provision for educating
their children. The State of South Carolina
was "a very rich and fertile province, and
was peopled by many wealthy inhabitants",
who " lived in great ease and splendour"
(p. 143). Harvard College produced " from
fifty to sixty bachelors and masters
annually" (p. 54).
John Adams, who was ambassador to
Holland in 1782, published a book in
London entitled An Essay on Canon and
Feudal Law. This book was definitely
propagandist in tone, bigoted and unhistorical. He labelled " Canon and feudal
laws" as "systems of tyranny" from which
America happily escaped (Op. cit., p. 84).
" A native of America who cannot read
and write is as rare an appearance as a
Jacobite or Roman Catholic, that is, as
rare as a comet or an earthguake" (p. 91).
He stated that foreigners, who came to
this country (U.S.A.), said that they never
met "so much knowledge and civility
among the common people in any part
of the world". He thanked his forefathers
for making all that possible. " They made
an early provision by law that every town,
consisting of so many families should be
always furnished with a grammar school"
(Op. cit., p. 91).
Adams was guilty of more than mediaeval
credulity in writing off the Catholic Church
in the America of his day. In 1783 it is
estimated that there were 15,800 Catholics
in Maryland; 7,000 in Pennsylvania; l,500
in New York and 200 in Virginia. Catholic
formed about 25,000 out of a total population which did not exceed or perhaps reach
four million. (See article by Francis
Downing in Church and Society (1789-1950),
Arts Inc., New York, 1953, p. 847). Father
John Carroll, the first Prefect Apostolic
after the Treaty of Paris ratifying American
independence (1783) had served during
the Revolution, and was well known to
many of the leaders. Tallyrand's attempt to
have American priests placed wider a
French Vicar was foiled when Pope Pius VI
appointed the patriotic and highly gifted
John Carroll. The number of Catholic
"comets" were not so small or uninfluential
as John Adams suggested. The war of
Independence, like all wars, was not conducive
to improving educational facilities.
The various States were so concentrated
on the supreme problem of gaining their
collective freedom that little time could
be devoted to considering their particular
interests as separate entities. When, however,
the Treaty of Versailles (1783) was
signed by England, each State became more
conscious of its sovereignty, and viewed
with suspicion any movement which might
diminish the power which it had wrested
from the English Crown. The Continental
Congress, which came into existence during
the war, was, constitutionally speaking,
little more than a council of war accepted
by the thirteen States. The Articles of
Confederation agreed on in 1777 and
ratified in 1781, left many important
problems unsolved. The Articles were too
loose to secure unanimity in the event of
external troubles, while they were inadequate
to compose the internal differences
which menaced the Union as a whole.
Many States had refused to pay the levies
imposed on them by Congress. Commercial
jealousy between different States was rife,
and, even within the same State, there
were social and financial troubles which
were a danger to organised government.
Like all wars the struggle with England
had left its aftermath of economic and
social problems. Farmers, who had contracted
heavy debts to merchants, could
not find the means of payment and were
crying out for "cheap money". During
the war debts had accumulated in the
various States. There was not sufficient
metallic money available for the payment
of taxes and war debts. About half the
States of the Union had issued substitute
or paper currency which they regarded as
necessary and desirable when properly
regulated. Unfortunately prudence was not
observed, and the over issue of paper money
by many States made the notes practically
worthless. One must, however, admire
these efforts of America nearly two centuries
ago to break through the fetish,
which we now regard as "a relic of
barbarism", of regarding commodity
money as the one and only safe means of
payment.
Crucial years
The 1780's were a crucial period in
American financial and constitutional history.
The shortage of "hard" money, and
the depreciation in the value of the existing
note circulation, posed problems incapable
of a purely local or regional solution. A
national solution was imperative, and that
could only be realised by the adoption of a
Federal Government and a Federal
Constitution.
The State of Massachusetts adopted a
strong line in dealing with the petitions of
farmers to have paper money issued on the
security of their land to enable them to
pay their debts and taxes. This refusal led
to an "agrarian revolution", which was
short-lived because firmly and diplomatically
dealt with. Indignation and
resentment were not confined to the
farming community. In 1786 the townspeople
of Greenwich, Mass., complained
that they were oppressed by heavy taxes;
their property was being eaten up by
lawyers' justice, and that the Government
was the biggest spendthrift. Why should
his Excellency the Governor enjoy "eleven
hundred a year" while many are starving?
How can existing inequalities be reconciled
with "the principles of our (State) Constitution,
piety, justice, moderation, temperance"?
(See Morison, Sources and Documents
illustrating the American Revolution,
Oxford, 1923, pp. 209-225). Owing to the
shortage of currency even industrious
members of the community were confined
to gaol for non-payment of debts. In the
State of Massachusetts the people rose up
fully armed demanding the suspension of
the law-courts for enforcing the payment
of debts.
The prevailing insecurity made people
of property-the vast majority of Americans
were then owners of some property - feel
that America's hard-won political
liberty was in danger. The wealthier
Americans, who had given generously of
their resources during the war, naturally
desired what Hamilton called "greater
energy of government" (The Federalist
No. 26). Important economic groups,
big land-owners, holders of securities,
manufacturers and traders felt that financial
ruin was imminent unless some national
solution of debt payments, coinage and
other problems was arrived at. The United
States had no national system of coinage
until 1785, and new coins were not actually
issued until 1793. Various European coins
-English, French and Spanish-circulated
in the country, and the fluctuations in the
value of these had a depressing effect on
business. Though ostensibly the Convention
was convoked for the purpose of amending
the Articles of Confederation, it was
obvious from the beginning that the
solution of the above problems lay in
the adoption of a Federal or National
Constitution. The Federal Constitution of
1787 was the outcome. Some of the States
were slow to recognise the "imbecility"
of the Confederation, or to ratify the
the Constitution. At first it was ratified by
only two States, Delaware, Pennsylvania.
Most other States followed in 1788.
North Carolina and Rhode Island,
did not join the Union until George
Washington was inaugurated President in
1789.
Broadly speaking, the Southern States
represented the landed interest, and were
suspicious of the financial and commercial
interests of the North who were urging
the adoption of the Constitution. From the
debates of the Federal Convention, and
from. the discussions to which the Constitution
gave rise when submitted to the
various State assemblies for ratification, one
can obtain a fair idea of the different currents
of thought, both with regard to property,
and to political and social theory, in
America. It is important, however, to note
that the excitement and fear of anarchy
which prevailed led men, who in calmer
times would have espoused more liberal
social and political views, to adopt a rather
conservative attitude. The Federal Constitution
was largely a piece de circonstance.
If, in some of its features, it was less
democratic than one would expect, that
may have been due to a genuine fear of an
untried democracy rather than to any
conscious adoption of European ideas.
Some, influenced by Montesquieu's writings,
thought that a Republican form of
government could only be a success in a
small territory. A Federal Constitution and
a Federal Government would, they thought,
endanger private property and put an end
to Republican rule.
John Adams in his A Defence of the
Constitutions of Government of the U.S.A.
(Philadelphia 1787, p. 5) replied to Turgot,
the French Minister, who complained that
"the customs of England are imitated in
most of the new constitutions in America".
"Why," asked Adams, "should one reject
customs or institutions which are good
just because they happen to be English?"
Other writers during the discussions on
the Constitution by the people claimed
that the welfare of the people was largely
independent of the State. "Good government" was, in fact, a consequence rather
than a cause of the people's virtue, industry,
and economy. If the people work
hard enough, they can become as rich as
they are free. That was to become the
authentic voice of America. When
Hamilton declared that the Federal Constitution
was "in every rational sense, and
to every useful purpose, a Bill of Rights",
he was obviously thinking of the rights
of States rather than of the rights of
individuals. The striking fact about the
Constitution is the absence of any declaration
of individual rights such as that contained
in the Declaration of Independence.
That document was prefaced by a declaration
of the " unalienable rights of man to
life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness".
The framers of the American Constitution
were more prudent than the French " Constitution
mongers" of 1791, 1793 and 1795.
The latter placed a statement of the rights
of man at the head of their constitutions
because they regarded the rights to liberty,
equality and fraternity as belonging to all
humanity. There was good reason for this
American caution. The economic and social
disturbances following the close of the War
of Independence made men with a good
stake in the country suspicious of abstract
discussions on the rights of man.
If, for example, the Federal Constitution
contained a clause similar to that quoted
from the Declaration of Independence,
one can imagine what doubts might arise
in the minds of some as to how far existing
property rights prevented them from
pursuing their natural right to happiness.
The same reasons which prevented a
denunciation of slavery in the Declaration
of Independence, the fear of alienating the
powerful proprietary interests of the South
and thus wrecking American unity, operated
also when it came to framing the
Constitution. Because some " Southern
gentlemen" disapproved of the strictures
passed on George III for negativing " the
repeated repeals of the law" permitting
the importation of slaves, it was omitted
from the catalogue of grievances in the
Declaration of Independence. In vain did
Colonel Mason in the Convention debates
condemn " the infernal traffic", which
"originated in the avarice of British
merchants", and in vain did others insist
on the essential dignity of all human labour.
The Constitution was really favourable
to slavery. It perpetuated the distinction
between freemen and slaves, although it
employed such euphemisms as " those
bound to service for a term of years" to
describe the latter.
If the framers of the Constitution refrained
from calling things by their names,
it may be that they felt that the Constitution
would outlive slavery; and that its toleration,
as Lord Bacon said of interest-taking,
was a concession to men on account of the
hardness of their hearts. But that toleration
lasted too long and should not have required
a Civil War to end it. The new inventions
and the development of English manufactures gave a fresh impetus to the demand
for cheap labour in America which American
capitalists were determined to exploit
to the fullest. So that even after the slave
trade was abolished in 1808, Virginia found
it profitable " to raise a large number of
slaves to be sold to the people further
South".
The approval of slavery in the middle of
the nineteenth century is less easily condoned.
In 1850 when the United States
was about to receive the territories of
New Mexico and Utah into the Union,
it allowed them to join the Union "with
or without slavery, as their constitutions
should at the time prescribe". It is regrettable
that for the continuation of
slavery until the 19 June, 1862, many
Christian bodies must accept some responsibility.
The Society of Friends was exceptional.
It excluded slaveholders from
its membership. The Reverend James
Smylie of Mississippi, who wrote in favour
of negro slavery in the early nineteenth
century, gives some idea of the extent to
which slavery was approved by the members
of various denominations. "If slavery",
he writes, " be a sin, and advertising and
apprehending slaves with a view to restore
them to their masters, is a direct violation
of the Divine Law .. . then three-fourths
of all the Episcopalians, Methodists, Baptists
and Presbyterians in Eleven States of
the Union, are of the devil. They hold, if
they do not buy and sell, slaves" (Cited in
The American Churches, the Bulwark of
American Slavery by an American (E.
Habich?), Newburyport, 1842, p. 29).
The Constitution not only assumed that
property in human beings is lawful but
it also helped to convert the presumption
that property is normally the reward of
industry into a prejudice against State
intervention with regard to all forms of
property, howsoever acquired.
The Constitution forms a striking contrast
to the Declaration of Independence
which did not mention the right of
property amongst the " unalienable rights
of man". These rights were confined to
"Life, Liberty, and Happiness" in the
Declaration. Such rights, of course, contain
a concealed reference not only to
private property, but also to social security
and social justice. The right to life and
happiness involves at least a minim.um
amount of material wealth. The right to
liberty would be a nebulous thing for
people deprived of the means of subsistence
or of the opportunity of procuring them.
The late Monsignor John A. Ryan of
Washington, D.C., believed that in the
"organic" or constitutional law of no other
country does the right of property receive
such favourable and tender treatment as it
receives in the Constitution of the United
States.
What Monsignor Ryan and other critics
of the Federal Constitution deplored were
its sins of omission. It made no provision
whereby the growth of anti-social property
rights might be checked and human rights
safeguarded. The development of an equitable
system of taxation was retarded until
1913, when the Federal Constitution was
amended to allow the levying of income
tax by Congress.
The reforms carried out by President
Jackson, such as the abolition of property
qualifications for the exercise of the
franchise, and, owing to his influence, the
disappearance about the middle of the
last century of property qualifications for
holding office in practically all the States,
paved the way for a truly democratic
America. A few States like Deleware and
Massachusetts retained the property qualification
for office until the end of the
century.
Three years after the emancipation of
the negro population a new Amendment,
(the fourteenth), was added to the Constitution
which gave property more than
its traditional power in the conduct of the
nation's affairs. The Fourteenth Amendment was designed to safeguard the newly-won
freedom of the negroes, but in reality
it also served to restrict the legislative
powers of the various States, particularly
with regard to economic life. This famous
Fourteenth Amendment of 1868, or rather
the interpretation of it which gained ground
after l873, proved a serious obstacle to the
growth of social legislation in the United
States when the pace and complexity of
American economic life had entered on a
stupendous phase.
The Amendment declared that "No
State shall make or enforce any law which
shall abridge the privileges or immunities
of the United States; nor shall any State
deprive any person of life, liberty or
property, without due process of law".
The driving forces behind the Fourteenth
Amendment, according to Roscoe
Conkling who served on the committee
that drafted it, were wealthy people and
joint-stock companions who felt that their
economic behaviour was being too closely
scrutinised by State legislatures (See Charles
A. Beard, Contemporary American History,
New York 1920, pp. 73-87). One of the
best known early illustrations of the
Supreme Court's interference with the
economic legislation of the States occurred
in 1889. The State of Minnesota passed a
law conferring power upon a Railway
Commission to fix " reasonable rates". The
Commission fixed a certain price for the
transportation of milk between two places.
The Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Co.
refused to carry out the recommendations,
protesting that the rate fixed was too low.
The Commission applied to the Supreme
Court for a decision, and a majority of the
Court decided against the Commission's
right to fix rates. It was ruled unconstitutional
and opposed to the Fourteenth
Amendment. In 1905 a law passed by the
State of New York prohibiting the manufacture
of cigars under unhygienic conditions
was declared null and void by the
Supren1e Court. With regard to social
legislation, the Supreme Court's power of
judicial review was conditioned by a highly
individualistic social philosophy.
The immense expansion which took
place in the economic life of the United
States of America in the second half of
the nineteenth century has tended to make
her people forget the shadows in that
picture of progress. It was not until the
present century, when confronted with
widespread unemployment under the
Roosevelt administration, that the United
States began to tread the paths blazed by
Germany and England in the realm of social
legislation. The passing of the Social
Security Act in 1935 encouraged the passing
of legislation by the various States to deal
with unemployment, old age pensions,
blind persons, etc. The Federal old age
insurance, which is an exception to the
general pattern established by the Act, is
wholly federal in its administration. So
preoccupied with and so successful in
mastering its physical environment,
America was slow, until recent decades,
to realise the importance of controlling
the social environment. The denial of
political and economic equality to the
coloured population after the abolition of
slavery was a blot on American democratic
ideals. The right of Negro citizens to vote
was made "a legal reality" in 1944· The
condemnation of racial segregation by the
Supreme Court has now opened the door
to full civil rights for all.
A French observer of American life in
the early nineteenth century, de Tocqueville,
said he knew "no country where the love
of money has taken a stronger hold on the
affections of men" (Democracy in America,
1838, Vol. I, p. 45). Another Frenchman,
Andre Siegfried has gone further by asserting
in this century that America as a whole
is "a materialistic society, organised to
produce things rather than people with
output set up as a god" (America Comes of
Age, English trans, 1930, p. 341). He thinks
that "the mysticism of success is perhaps
their genuine religion and with it is combined
a guileless optimism and a worship
of energy and life". (Op. cit., p. 53).
Few, if any writers, are capable of assessing
the true character of another nation.
What developed country today is not, to
some extent, tainted with the cult of comfort?
What other nation has given such
striking proofs as America has, of how
money can be employed as an instrument
of service and genuine charity towards
mankind. America is unique amongst the
nations of the world in having its faith and
trust in God proclaimed on the back of
every Federal Reserve bank note. "In God
we trust."
