I . Introduction
The intervention of the Irish Catholic
hierarchy in the Conscription crisis
of 1918 was, to all outward appearances at least, prompt , unanimous and
decisive. Its two focal points were two
meetings held in April of that year , the first
an ordinary meeting of the Standing Committee
of the bishops which was held in
Dublin on 9 April and the second, a general
meeting of the Irish hierarchy specially
convened at Maynooth College on 18 April.
As a result of the decisions and pronouncements of these two episcopal gatherings
the Catholic bishops became in large
measure the overall leaders of nationalist
Ireland in its opposition to compulsory
military service imposed by the British
parliament. While they received the plaudits
of nationalists of all shades, they did not
escape the censure of some Irishmen and
many Englishmen who held that the episcopal
action was either inconsistent or
ultra vires. The bishops thus found themselves
for a short period at the centre of
vigorous controversies, in which politicians,
journalists, theologians and members of the
general public all played some part. While
many of the basic issues involved in these
controversies may sound very remote to us
today, the sequence of events which produced
them deserves close attention in this
anniversary year, both because of the
unparalleled Irish unity which they inspired
and the victory for the popular will which
was there by achieved.
2. The Episcopal Meetings And
Statements
By the time the episcopal Standing
Committee met on Tuesday, 9 April, the
threat of conscription was already very
much in the air. It had often been alluded
to during the East Tyrone By-Election
Campaign which resulted in a victory for
the parliamentary party over Sinn Fein on
4 April. On the day before the meeting of
the Bishops' Standing Committee, Dublin
Corporation had called on the Lord Mayor,
Laurence O'Neill, to convoke a conference
of the leaders of various shades of nationalist
opinion to formulate a united policy against
conscription. On the evening of the day on
which the Standing Committee met in
Dublin, Lloyd George introduced the
Military Service Bill in the House of
Commons in London.
The Standing Committee of the Irish
bishops was at that time accustomed to hold
its Low Weck Meetings in Newman House
in Saint Stephen's Green. Some shots taken
by a cine-camera as the bishops emerged
from the meeting and incorporated into
the Gael-Linn film Saoirse? show the
Cardinal and some of the other bishops, in
tall hats, coming down the steps outside
Newman House, although the commentary
at that point has gone on to deal with the
later meeting at Maynooth. The Dublin
meeting was presided over by Cardinal
Logue and was attended also by Archbishops
Walsh of Dublin and Harty of
Cashel (Archbishop Healy of Tuam having
died the previous month) and by Bishops
O'Donnell (Raphoe), O'Dea (Galway),
Foley (Kildare and Leighlin), Kelly (Ross)
and Browne (Cloyne). After the meeting
the following statement was issued to the
press:
" Statements have recently been appearing
in the press to indicate that the
Government intend to include this
country in a measure of conscription.
Whether there is any foundation for
these rumours we know not at the
moment. But since the outbreak of
hostilities four years ago the War Office
has shown such utter lack of real touch
with Irish conditions that it is quite
possible something may be now proposed,
which, if attempted, would only
crown the disasters which want of
knowledge and want of sympathy have
already entailed. To enforce conscription
here without the consent of the people
would be perfectly unwarrantable and
would soon and inevitably end in
defeating its own purposes. Had the
Government in any reasonable time
given Ireland the benefit of the principles
which are declared to be at stake in the
war, by the concession of a full measure
of self-government, there would have
been no occasion for contemplating
forced levies from her now. What
between mismanagement and mischief-making,
this country has already been
deplorably upset, and it would be a
fateful mistake, surpassing the worst
blunders of the past four years, to furnish
a telling plea now for desperate course
by an attempt to enforce conscription.
With all the responsibility that attaches
to our pastoral office, we feel bound to
warn the Government against entering
upon a policy so disastrous to the public
interest and to all order, public and
private."
Michael Cardinal Logue,
Chairman.
Robert Browne,
Bishop of Cloyne, Secretary.
Patrick Foley,
Bishop of Kildare and
Leighlin, Secretary pro tem.
The statement has some of the bluntness
and homespun quality which often appeared in the utterances of Cardinal Logue
and I would hazard a guess that it probably
derived mainly from his pen. Considering
that a number of the Irish bishops had
previously, in pastorals and public statements, urged their people strongly to
support the British war effort, the pronouncement of 9 April, 1918, represented,
for an episcopal gathering, a surprisingly
strong condemnation of British policy in
Ireland since the beginning of the war,
both in the political and military spheres.
While the Standing Committee of the
Bishops, in a decision which was not then
made public, went a step further and empowered
Cardinal Logue to summon a
special meeting of the whole Hierarchy for
the following week to pronounce on
conscription, there is some evidence to
suggest that this extra meeting was to be
conditional on the Catholic clergy's being
made liable to military service.
The Military Service Bill, as at first
introduced into the Commons, made no
exception in favour of the clergy, and
Cardinal Logue lost no time in summoning
the Hierarchy to meet at Maynooth on
Thursday, 18 April, the day already fixed
for the Mansion House Conference in
Dublin. Tension mounted during the
intervening week and a series of anti-conscription
demonstrations was arranged
for the week-end. The Cardinal did not
attend the demonstration in Armagh on
Sunday, 14 April-he was administering
Confirmation in Dungannon on that day.
But he sent a message of strong support:
"I am heart and soul with the meeting in
Armagh. Forcible conscription is an outrage
on the clergy and people of Ireland. There
is nothing for it but passive resistance to it
in every shape and form." Armagh tradition
still recalls the huge gathering which
assembled near the Catholic Cathedral and
adopted a Soleiru1 Covenant pledging the
thousands present to offer passive resistance
to conscription. The part played by the
Cathedral clergy in the meeting and the
emphasis given to the phrase, passive
resistance, suggest that this pioneer demonstration
in Armagh and its pledge were
mainly the work of the Cardinal, or at least
they were in full accord with his views,
despite his absence on the occasion. They
were to be the methods adopted on a
national scale a week later, though by then
the exclusive emphasis on passive resistance
had vanished.
On the day of the Armagh gathering,
Cardinal Logue, preaching at Dungannon,
announced that he had called a meeting of
the Hierarchy for the following Thursday
to consider the conscription proposals.
"The initiation of such proposals", he went
on, "is the gravest blunder the Government
has made during its existence. They will
lead to the utmost disorder and chaos in
Ireland and will be met with the most
strenuous passive resistance. Anything in
the nature of organised physical resistance
is to be deprecated and would not be
favoured by me."
On the same Sunday a number of other
bishops preached strong sermons against
conscription, from which the following
short excerpts may be quoted:-
Doctor Gilmartin of Clonfert, in Loughrea
Cathedral:
"Ireland is a nation and she has a
right to determine on what conditions
she is going to give the blood of her
sons. Now it is proposed to treat her
as if her sons were slaves".
Doctor Naughton of Killala, in Ballina
Cathedral:
"To anyone acquainted with the
deep feelings of resentment engendered
among all classes of nationalists by the
deception practised upon them in
recent years, it is appalling to contemplate
what the result will be if the
Government persist in their insane
determination to apply conscription
to Ireland".
Doctor McKenna of Clogher, in Monaghan
Cathedral:
"Considering the present temper of
the people and the united opposition
to this measure, it is bound to bring
about evils of the most appalling
character".
Other bishops sent messages of support
to anti-conscription demonstrations held in
their dioceses on 14-15 April, which included
the following significant passages:
Doctor Foley of Kildare and Leigh/in to
Carlow meeting, 14 April:
"Does any sane man believe that
this panicky action of the Government
will add a single man to the Allied
Forces in France?"
Doctor Brownrigg of Ossory to Kilkenny
meeting, 14 April:
". . . it is time for resolution and
united action. What that action is
going to be will be decided within
the present week by those in whom.
now all parties put their trust. Meanwhile
I would earnestly deprecate any
resort to violence or physical force,
which could only produce disaster
and destroy all chance of meeting
successfully the present emergency".
Doctor Fogarty of Killaloe to Roscrea
meeting, l4 April:
" ... the people are entitled not only
to protest against it but to resist it ....
The English Government may yet find
that it is not so easy to conscript a
nation against its will. I doubt if all
their efforts will get one Irishman to
fire a shot in this accursed war under
compulsion. The God of Heaven is
more powerful than their armies".
Doctor Hallinan of Limerick to Limerick
meeting, 15 April:
"Stand erect, close up your ranks,
put your backs to the wall, shout at
the top of your voices-and let your
voices be in unison-on no account
are we Irishmen going to consent to
military conscription by the British
Government in this country".
Doctor Cahalan of Cork not only wrote
a letter against conscription which was read
at Masses in Cork on Sunday 14 April, but
he was one of the platform party at a huge
anti-conscription rally in the city on the
following evening and proposed the first
resolution.
It will be observed that while several of
the bishops stressed that resistance to conscription
should be passive and non-violent,
the bishops of Killaloe and Limerick used
language which did not seem to exclude
active resistance. They were two of the
small number of bishops who had already
openly shown sympathy with Sinn Fei11
and who were soon to be more closely
associated with it. While several of the
other bishops referred to Lloyd George's
Cabinet as "the Government", as had the
statement of the Episcopal Standing Committee,
Bishops Fogarty and Hallinan were
careful to refer to it as "the English Government"
and "the British Government"
respectively.
On Tuesday, 16 April, the Military
Service Bill passed through the House of
Commons, but an amendment was introduced
exempting the clergy from conscription.
Was it a piece of sugar-coating
added to make the measure more palatable
to the Irish episcopate in view of their
severe denunciations of it over the weekend?
As a protest against the inclusion of
Ireland within the scope of the bill, John
Dillon led the Irish nationalists out of the
House of Commons, and on the following
day the bill received the royal assent.
Conscription could now be applied to
Ireland by the signing of an Order in
Council. On the same day a letter from
Archbishop Walsh appeared in the
Freeman's Journal pointing out that while
Irishmen were being called on to resist
conscription, they were not being told
what precisely they ought to do by way
of resistance. I take this letter as an indication
that Archbishop Walsh was not too
happy about the negative approach inherent
in the phrase, passive resistance. Since he
had already been critical of the Irish
Parliamentary Party in 1917, he was much
closer to the Fogarty-Hallinan viewpoint
than either of the other two Archbishops.
Besides, the President of Sinn Fein and of
the Volunteers, Eamon de Valera, had been
in contact with him a few days earlier,
and had conveyed to him that the Volunteers
intended to offer active resistance to
conscription, including the use of force
if necessary.
Such was the background to the historic
meeting of the Irish hierarchy at Maynooth
College on Thursday, 18 April. Twenty-seven
bishops were present-Logue
(Armagh), Walsh (Dublin), Harty (Cashel),
Brownrigg (Ossory), O'Donnell (Raphoe),
Browne (Cloyne), Hoare (Ardagh and
Clonmacnoise), Foley (Kildare and
Leighlin), Kelly (Ross), O'Dea (Galway
and Kilmacduagh), Fogarty (Killaloe),
Gaughran (Meath), McHugh (Derry),
McKenna (Clogher), Gilmartin (Clonfert),
Finnegan (Kilmore) , Morrisroe (Achonry),
Naughton (Killala), Coyne (Elphin),
Cahalan (Cork), McRory (Down and
Connor), Hackett (Waterford and Lismore)
, Mulhern (Dromore), O'Sullivan
(Kerry), Codd (Ferns), Hallinan (Limerick)
and Higgins (Bishop of Temno and
Auxiliary in Tuam). There were no absentees. Doctor Higgins died four days
later. The morning session was devoted
mainly to the implications of conscription
for the students of Maynooth. It was
decided that all students not called to
major orders should be sent home on the
following day and that major orders should
be conferred on the others at once instead
of waiting till the normal time in June.
The Order List was read on the same
evening, the Ordination Retreat began
on Saturday, 20 April, subdiaconate and
diaconate were conferred during the
following week, and the 1918 ordination
class was raised to the priesthood on Sunday,
28 April. Among those still alive who owed
their early priestly ordination to the conscription
crisis are the Bishop of Derry,
the Most Reverend Doctor Farren; The
Very Reverend Edward O'Brien, P.P.,
D.C.L., Aughrim Street, Dublin, a member
of the Canon Law Faculty of Maynooth
College; The Very Reverend Sean O Neill,
P.P., Kilsaran, County Louth, a prominent
figure in the Irish Revival movement;
The Very Reverend Peter Blowick of
Saint Columban's, An Uaimh, one of the
survivors from the pioneer days of the
Maynooth Mission to China; and the Very
Reverend William Lillis, P.P., Saint
Laurence O'Toole's, Seville Place, Dublin,
who in the most recent issue of Vexilla
Regis has recalled those exciting days in
Maynooth in a lively article.
Meanwhile the conference of political
leaders (de Valera and Griffith representing
Sinn Fein, Dillon and Devlin representing
the Parliamentary Party, Healy and O'Brien
representing the All for Ireland League,
Tom Johnson, William O'Brien and M. J.
Egan representing the Trade Unions and
Labour movement) was in session in the
Dublin Mansion House under the chairmanship
Of Lord Mayor O'Neill and agreed
to accept a declaration and pledge against
conscription which had been submitted by
de Valera. The latter had, earlier on the
same morning, called on Archbishop Walsh
in Dublin before the archbishop set out for
Maynooth, and had asked him. to try to
prevent the bishops coming to a final
decision until they would receive information
of what had been decided at the
Mansion House. Instead of simply sending
a message to the bishops, the Mansion
House Conference decided to send some of
its members as a delegation to Maynooth,
and the Lord Mayor, de Valera, Dillon,
Healy and O'Brien (I.T.G.W.U.) were
chosen. Maynooth College tradition still
recounts with some relish the expression
with which Tim Healy conveyed his
reluctance to travel in the same vehicle
as John Dillon and the way that the Sinn
Fein leader freed the two old Parliamentarians
from an embarrassing situation.
The delegates arrived in Maynooth in
the early afternoon. According to contemporary
newspaper accounts " they were
loudly cheered by the students", a fact
which is borne out after almost half a
century by the recollections of Father
Lillis: "Some of the students walking the
square saw the taxis arriving and a huge
cheer of welcome resounded as they recognized
de Valera, Griffith, Dillon, Healy,
O'Brien and Johnson" (No doubt the
bishops' decision to allow the students
home next day made the cheer particularly
resounding, but it scarcely explains how
they recognized Griffith and Johnson
among the visitors!). The delegates were
brought at once to the resumed meeting
of the bishops and discussions began. No
detailed account of the discussions has yet
been published to my knowledge, and the
only survivors of the historic meeting are
now President de Valera and William
O'Brien. It may be expected that when
their reminiscences are published they will
fill out in detail our knowledge of the
circumstances in which the bishops finally
came to their decisions. The last episcopal
survivor (Doctor Fogarty) died in 1955,
and it is to be hoped that at least a few of
the twenty-seven bishops present have also
left written accounts behind them of what
took place. Meanwhile, the following
summary, based on the recollections of
participants on both sides given much later
in conversation, is, I believe, a reasonably
accurate account of the proceedings.
After the delegates had been introduced
by the Lord Mayor, Mr. de Valera intervened
to express the view that a statement
exhorting the people to "passive resistance"
would be of little value. He pointed out
that the Volunteers were determined to
resist in any case and submitted that their
Lordships should avoid in their statement
anything that might be later used against
this resistance. In the discussions which
followed, Mr. Dillon supported Mr. de
Valera's view that the only way to defeat
conscription was to decide that it would be
opposed by every available means. One of
the bishops (Doctor Fogarty, according
to one of my informants) asked Mr. de
Valera if the delegates would agree with
an episcopal statement advocating resistance
"according to the moral law". Mr. de
Valera replied that such a phrase was proper
and to be expected in an episcopal document,
but if it appeared in a statement coming
from the political leaders, it could be
misinterpreted. The delegates withdrew
before the end of the episcopal meeting
and at 4.30 p.m. a statement signed by all
twenty-seven bishops was issued to the
press:
"An attempt is being made to force
conscription upon Ireland against the will
of the Irish nation and in defiance of the
protests of its leaders.
In view especially of the historic
relations between the two countries
from the very beginning up to the present
moment, we consider that conscription
forced in this way upon Ireland is an
oppressive and inhuman law, which the
Irish people have a right to resist by all
the means that arc consonant with the
law of God.
We wish to remind our people that
there is a higher Power which controls
the affairs of men. They have in their
hands a means of conciliating that
Power by strict adherence to the Divine
Law, by more earnest attention to their
religious duties and by fervent and
persevering prayer.
In order to secure the aid of the Holy
Mother of God who shielded our people
in the days of their greatest trials, we
have already sanctioned a National
Novena in honour of Our Lady of
Lourdes, commencing on the 3rd of
May, to secure general and domestic
peace.
We also exhort the heads of families
to have the Rosary recited every evening
with the intention of protecting the
spiritual and temporal welfare of our
beloved country and bringing us safe
through this cns1s of unparalleled
gravity".
In a separate directive addressed to the
clergy the bishops ordered: (l) that a public
Mass of intercession should be celebrated
in every church on the following Sunday
to avert the scourge of conscription ; (2)
that priests should announce at all public
Masses on the following Sunday the time
and place of a public meeting to be held
later on the same day when the anti-conscription
pledge would be administered:
"Denying the right of the British Government
to enforce compulsory service in this
country, we pledge ourselves solemnly to
one another to resist conscription by the
most effective means at our disposal"; (3)
that the clergy should announce on the
following Sunday that a church-gate collection
would be taken up at an early date
to provide an anti-conscription fund.
The clergy were asked to take publication
of these directions in the press as sufficient
notification.
An analysis of these documents reveals
several interesting features. In the first place,
they outline a specific programme of both
spiritual and temporal aids in the struggle
against conscription, thus going far to fill
the Lacuna which had been emphasised in
Archbishop Walsh's letter of 16 April.
Secondly, they make no mention of passive
resistance, the phrase used by Cardinal Logue
on the previous Sunday. Thirdly, they
condemn "conscription forced upon
Ireland" in se, rather than dwelling on the
evils which preceded it or would follow
from it, as was the case with the Standing
Committee's statement and the utterances
of several of the bishops during the previous
week. Fourthly, they ensure complete
harmony between the ecclesiastical and
national protests against conscription by
incorporating the Mansion House Conference's
pledge in their directive to the
clergy and ordering the time and place for
its administration to be announced in the
churches. Finally, in regard to terminology,
it may be noted that unlike the earlier
episcopal pronouncement, these ones nowhere
refer to the body responsible for
passing conscription as " the Government";
and by taking over the wording of the
Mansion House pledge they are made to
refer once to it as " the British Government".
They studiously avoid any mention of
Great Britain or England, however, and
this leads to a sort of anacoluthon in the
press statement at the beginning of paragraph
2, where " the historic relations
between the two countries" are mentioned
although only Ireland has previously been
named. There can be no doubt, then, that
if, say, the statements of Cardinal Logue
and Bishop Fogarty at the previous weekend
are taken to represent two schools of
thought among the hierarchy, the Maynooth
meeting ended with victory for the
latter's position and its adoption for the
sake of unity by all. Indeed New Ireland
hinted at something like this later when it
reported:
"There is a well-authenticated story
that His Eminence Cardinal Logue felt
a little uneasy after he had signed this
pronouncement, but was assured by a
most reverend colleague that this was
the greatest day's work for Ireland since
the Confederation of Kilkenny".
Sunday, 21 April, brought scenes of
great enthusiasm throughout Ireland when
the people of each parish assembled at the
appointed time and place (usually at the
church gates) to take the anti-conscription
pledge and sign their names on the local
list. Never in modern Irish history has there
been such unanimity among Irish nationalists.
The Catholics were almost one hundred
per cent behind the protest, while
despite the public approval given by the
Protestant Archbishops of Armagh and
Dublin to the inclusion of Ireland in the
conscription act, many Protestants signed
a special protest against it organised by Miss
Nelly O'Brien. In households where a live
patriotism has been handed on from one
generation to the next, one still occasionally
finds a framed souvenir of the occasion in
a place of honour, perhaps side by side on
the wall with Robert Emmet in his green
coat and Gladstone introducing the Home
Rule Bill. It has photographs of the Archbishops
of Armagh and Dublin and of all
the political leaders who attended the
Mansion House Conference with the exception
of Tom Johnson; it shows Maynooth
College and the Mansion House,
see picture of the pledge on the previous
page, and it provides the text of the
bishops' statements, the declaration of the
Mansion House Conference and the anti-conscription
pledge, followed by the all-important
words: "The above was signed
by me at on ------
day of 1918."
Two days after the anti-conscription
pledge was so widely taken, the general
strike organised by the Trade Unions
showed still further the determination of
the Irish people not to submit to conscription,
and this was followed on 3 May by the
National Novena to Our Lady of Lourde
which ended with scenes of great devotion
on Sunday, 12 May. The newspapers
commented on the huge numbers who
went to Holy Communion on that Sunday,
and by a happy coincidence the Roman
decree authorizing the beatification of
Oliver Plunkett was issued on the same
day. With morale now running very high
-even the arrest of most of the Sinn Fein
leaders, including de Valera and Griffith,
on 17 May failed to weaken it-the determination
of the people to resist conscription
remained unshaken throughout the summer,
and it was constantly reiterated by such
events as the Women's Protest March on
9 June (Feast of Saint Colmcille) and the
East Cavan election campaign during the
same month. By the late summer it was
announced that the anti-conscription fund
had reached a quarter of a million pounds.
Thousands joined the Volunteers as the
surest means of avoiding compulsory
service in the British army, and because it
was feared that the new session of
parliament would be the occasion for
putting the conscription act into force in
Ireland, An tOglach instructed them clearly
what to do: "In this emergency every true
Volunteer should know how to act for
himself; it is his duty to resist conscription
to the death. Don't argue-shoot!" Determination
to resist carried the day, for the
Great War came to an end with the threat
to extend conscription to Ireland still not
carried out.
3. Support For The Bishops' Stand
The episcopal decisions were so clear-cut
and the episcopal condemnation of conscription
so strongly worded ("an
oppressive and inhuman law") that to many
Irish nationalists they must have seemed
almost too good to be true. Supporters of
Sinn Fein policy would have found them
particularly gratifying, for the bishops had
declared the Irish people entitled to resist
a law passed by the British parliament and
had called for the administration of a
pledge drawn up by the Sinn Féin leader
himself Not surprisingly, therefore, the
bishops' action, while applauded by all
sections of Irish nationalists, received its
warmest welcome from groups and journals
sympathetic to Sinn Fein.
Actually the first influential group to
send news of unqualified support met far
from Ireland. On 10 April about a hundred
and fifty priests, past students of Maynooth,
were assembled for their annual meeting at
the Hotel Astor, New York, when they
heard of the statement issued by the
episcopal Standing Committee on the
previous day. With such patriotic priests
in their midst as Father Tim Shanley, a
dominant figure on the Irish-American
scene until his death in the 1950s, and
Father Larry Murray, founder of Comhaltas
Uladh, of An tUltach and of Coláiste Bhríde,
Rann na Feirste in the 1920s, they passed a
series of resolutions of which the following
has special relevance:
"That we heartily approve the action
of the Irish bishops in opposing conscription
in Ireland until Ireland has the
power of self-determination.
That this resolution be cabled to
Cardinal Logue and the Irish bishops
assembled in Dublin".
As soon as the decisions taken at Maynooth
a week later became known, the
nationalist journals, both in Ireland and
U.S.A., chorused their approval: for
example:
Nationality (edited by Arthur Griffith),
27 April, 1918:
"The Catholic hierarchy of Ireland
has been true to its great mission and
its noblest traditions in the crisis, and
its action in ranging itself in the van of
the nation ensures that between religion
and patriotism no conflict will ever
occur in Ireland, and it strips the mask
from the face of a foreign force
claiming a moral sanction to dispose of
the lives and honour of Irishmen".
New Ireland (edited by P. J. Little), 27
April, 1918:
"There never was a time when the
Hierarchy and the people were so
closely united upon any question of
Irish statesmanship".
The Irish Press, Philadelphia (edited by
Patrick MacCartan), 27 April, 1918:
"One of the most gratifying features
of the nation-wide determination to
resist conscription, as it certainly was
one of the most significant, was the
resolution of protest so promptly
passed by the Irish bishops. The Irish
hierarchy is probably the most conservative
body in the Catholic Church.
It invariably moves slowly and deliberately,
and when it speaks, ex cathedra
as it were, from. its meeting place in
Maynooth College, its pronouncements
are regarded somewhat in the
light of those of the Supreme Court
of the United States-without question
and above reproach" (from Notes of
the Week, by J. St. George Joyce).
Now that the bishops' statement seemed
to have given them the green light,
nationally-minded priests, in sermon and
speech, were loud in their condemnation
of British policy in Ireland, and some had
no hesitation in openly justifying active
resistance to it. Father Myles Ronan, the
distinguished Dublin historian, was quoted
as describing conscription in a sermon in the
Pro-Cathedral as "the most mischievous
attempt made here since Cromwell proscribed
the Irish to hell or Connacht".
Preaching in Galway Father Walsh, O.F.M.,
was reported as emphasizing that
"theologians commonly taught that the
people could lawfully resist such unjust
government aggression". A Father
Donohue hit the headlines at a public
meeting at Kiltegan, County Wicklow, by
stating that "unless it were proved to him
-and he did not think it would-that he
was acting against the law of God, it
would nee d at leas t four men to take him".
Perhaps a few of the bishops were now
coming to realise that they had set something
in motion which might go far beyond
what they had intended, and it was freely
rumoured that Cardinal Logue was having
second thoughts on the matter. Clerical
pronouncements were now being carefully
scrutinized for rebellious sentiments, as the
conscriptionists' come-back after the loss
of the first round to the bishops was to
mount an anti-episcopal and anti-clerical
campaign.
4. Criticism Of The Bishops' Stand
Strong criticism of the bishops' action
soon came from some English political
leaders and newspapers, from one section
of Catholic opinion in Great Britain, and
in Ireland from the Ulster Unionists, The
Irish Times and from. an occasional Irish
Catholic. The grounds of the criticism
varied according to the source from. which
it originated or the audience to which it was
addressed-thus the bishops found themselves
at various times within the next few
months accused of undue interference in
political affairs, of threatening spiritual
penalties against those who did not resist
conscription, of being in league with Sinn
Fein, of moving against conscription under
orders from Rome, of challenging the right
of the British Parliament to make laws for
Ireland, of sabotaging Irish Home Rule,
of preaching revolution and so on. Lloyd
George referred to " the challenge of
supremacy over the British Parliament by
the Nationalists and the Roman Catholic
hierarchy in connexion with the Sinn
Féiners." The Irish Times declared: "The
Roman Catholic Church has associated
itself with the party of revolution". The
Times wrote: "The Roman Catholic hierarchy
in Ireland have openly assumed the
right to interfere as a church in politics
and in so doing they have shaken to its
foundations the whole edifice of religious
tolerance in these islands ... the claim of
the Roman hierarchy to interfere as a
Church in politics is as serious as it is
intolerable. This is by no means the first
time that the bishops have postponed
self-government, which they have always
detested and fought in secret, but it is the
first time for many years that any Church in
these islands has set itself in open opposition
to the State or to the law". J. L. Garvin in
The Observer was no less outspoken in his
criticism: "The Catholic bishops have gone
the length of denying in principle and
practice the supremacy of the Imperial
Parliament on that very point of common
service and defence which is the most vital
of all. It touches the very existence of these
islands. On this there is no possibility of
compromise with the Irish bishops".
At least two papers of international
repute went close to scurrility in their
criticism., the Morning Post (" Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops and priests are preaching
resistance to the law of the United
Kingdom and are incidentally giving the
greatest possible assistance to Germany.
Are these ecclesiastics fulfilling instructions
sent by the Vatican"?) and the New York
Times ("Whether it is from learned bishops
or from frothing politicians, this resistance
to conscription is a stab at freedom ...
To the murderers of priests, to the ravishers
of nuns, to the destroyers of churches and
cathedrals, to the slayers of Catholics on
Good Friday at Mass in Paris, the Irish
Catholic Hierarchy now turns in
friendship").
An equally hostile attitude was adopted
by the Catholic Union of Great Britain.
At its meeting on 30 April, under its
president, Admiral Lord Walter Kerr, it
passed a number of resolutions condemning
the action of the Irish bishops as "apparently
supporting resistance to law", expressed
"serious misgivings on the interference of
ecclesiastical authority in purely temporal
and political questions" and declared that
" the Irish ought to share in the defence of
the Empire and of the liberties of mankind
from the grave peril to which they are
exposed by a cruel and unscrupulous
enemy." The resolutions were not only
published in the press but forwarded to
Rome. They provoked widespread resentment
in those Catholic circles in Great
Britain where the Irish element was strong,
and led to newspaper correspondence, from
which the following excerpt may be quoted.
It is part of a letter written from Surrey by
Sidney Parry, "one who is a British Catholic
and a lover of Ireland", presumably the
same who later became the husband of
Roger Casement's cousin, Gertrude
Bannister:
"There are many Catholics in Great
Britain who deeply resent the action of
the Catholic Union. Indeed one body,
the Salford Catholic Federation, has
already publicly protested. They feel
that the action of the Catholic Union is
an impertinent interference on the part of
the laity with the Irish Hierarchy, who
arc doing all in their power to prevent
the consummation of the crowning
blunder in the long series of England's
blundering treatment of Ireland. Many
Catholics like myself feel that if the
Irish hierarchy is censurable, it is not
the business of politically and racially
opposed laymen, however highly placed,
to censure them".
Although the Earl of Denbigh, in a particularly
hostile letter, declared that "the
action of the bishops had almost made him
ashamed of the word Catholic", the bishops
were not without both distinguished and
able defenders. Thus Father Bernard
Vaughan, S.J., Lord Braye, the well-known
Catholic peer, and Mr. Britton , secretary of
the English Catholic Truth Society, all
publicly repudiated the action of the
Catholic Union, while an able correspondent
in several papers, who signed himself
"An English VG", asserted that the organisation
represented only a tiny number of
upper-class English Catholics: "They no
more represent the Catholic laity of England
than the three tailors of Tooley Street fame
represented the people of England .... The
gentry of the Catholic Union of Great
Britain arc the lineal descendants of the old
gang concerning whom O'Connell expressed
regret he ever emancipated them".
Cardinal Logue reacted strongly to the
allegation that the action of the Irish bishops
had been taken under orders from Rome.
In an interview with a representative of the
Manchester Guardian on 29 April, he was
quoted as follows: "The Irish bishops have
received no instructions and no suggestions
from the Vatican about their attitude
towards conscription. If they had, it is
surely I who would know, and I do not
know anything of the kind". Asked if the
"No Popery" cry was likely to do harm
to the Church, he replied: "Not a bit of it,
but if persisted in, it might do harm to the
Allies". Writing from Coalisland to Archbishop
Walsh, on 2 May, the Cardinal
returned to the subject and also expressed
his resentment of the activities of the
Catholic Union of Great Britain:
"I do not see anything I can do to
contradict the calumny against the Holy
See beyond what I have said to the
correspondent of the Manchester
Guardian, which has been copied into all
the papers. I think there should be a
strong protest against the insolent attempt
of the Council of the English Catholic
Union to use the Pope as an instrument
for the coercion of the Irish bishops".
Finally it may be noticed that the Cardinal
Secretary of State, Cardinal Gasparri, in
reply to the President of the Catholic
Union of Great Britain, on 18 May, disclaimed
once more any responsibility on
Rome's part for the action of the Irish
bishops:
"In acknowledging receipt of resolutions
passed by the Catholic Union on
April 30, I beg to observe that the Holy
Sec, as already His Eminence Cardinal
Logue has publicly stated, had no part
whatever in the action taken by the
Irish bishops concerning the law of
conscription and received the first intimation
of the manifesto of the bishops
on 27th April, viz. eight days after its
publication".
Some criticism of the bishops' action
was made in a pamphlet entitled The Anti-Conscription
Movement : A Letter to an Irish
Catholic Bishop, April 1918, written by
Richardson Evans, a native of Cork, and
printed in London in May. The author
emphasized that in all the Home Rule
Bills defence was reserved to the Imperial
Parliament ; hence London could impose
conscription even on a self-governing
Ireland, not to mention one which was
directly under Westminster. For this reason
he strongly attacked the Nationalist party
for its opposition, while admitting that the
Sinn Fein opposition was at least consistent,
since its aim was national independence.
He called on the Catholic hierarchy to
make clear the grounds of their anti-conscription
policy and to state whether
they held compulsory military service to
be everywhere and at all times wrong. In
an interview given at Letterkenny to a
correspondent of the Cape Times on 24
May, Bishop O 'Donnell of Raphoc, the
member of the hierarchy who was most
closely identified with the Parliamentary
Party in the struggle for Home Rule, gave
a detailed account of the disappointments
which Irish nationalists had suffered in
their hopes of self-government. " It was
inevitable", he said, " that the opposition of
the bishops to conscription would revive
the old accusation that they do not desire
Home Rule. They in rapid succession
opposed partition, stood out in the Convention
for something like Dominion Self-Government
and joined in Anti-Conscription
. ... To the bishops conscription
is simply a threat of gross oppression which
as pastors of the flock they arc bound to
resist in every way permitted by the law
of God" .
Perhaps the most controversial and persistent
of all the critics of the bishops and
clergy on the conscription issue was Lord
Curzon. In the British House of Lords on
20 June he stated : "The Roman Catholic
clergy in Ireland advised their flocks under
pain of eternal damnation to resist conscription
to the uttermost". This was
denied in a statement issued from the
general meeting of the Hierarchy at Maynooth
on 25 June, with Cardinal Logue
in the chair: "Lord Curzon is reported to
have stated in the House of Lords on June
20, 1918, that the Irish Catholic clergy in
Ireland advised their flocks under pain of
eternal damnation to resist conscription .. ..
We protest against this grave calumny".
Lord Curzon replied: "I made no reference
to the bishops". He then proceeded to
give alleged excerpts from the speeches of
eight curates (their names are in the
Freeman’s Journal of 27 June) to support his
accusation. A number of the priests denied
having used the expressions attributed to
them and at least one of them threatened
proceedings for libel.
The position of the bishops was made
still more delicate when excerpts from the
anti-conscription speeches of several priests
were collected and forwarded to Rome.
According to the Rome correspondent of
the Catholic Times twenty-six priests in all
were involved, and the Vatican sent a copy
of the "evidence" which had been submitted
against them to the Irish Hierarchy.
One suspects that it was all part of a further
British effort to get Rome to put pressure
on the Irish bishops either to withdraw
their opposition to conscription or to
silence the most outspoken of their anti-conscription
clergy. The only result from
the Roman end of which the general
public became aware was a letter in August
from Pope Benedict XV to the Irish
bishops in which the Holy Father " invited
the clergy to act with caution and moderation,
especially where the situation is most
delicate and grave". A document in such
general terms must have been poor consolation
to conscription supporters whether
in Ireland or England ; in fact it contained
nothing which might not have been written
by the Irish bishops themselves, and it was
probably welcomed by some of them to
put a brake on the more advanced of the
clergy. For by the time it was issued a small
number of the "Sinn Fein priests" were in
trouble with their bishops. These developments
added to the suspicions in separatist
circles during the summer of 1918 that a
move was on foot to bring about a
rapprochement between the British government
and the Irish hierarchy, and this
was one of the many factors which made
it difficult to maintain the tripartite alliance
of IS April between the leadership of
Church, Sinn Fein and Parliamentary Party,
once the immediate danger of conscription
was over.
5. The Alliance Weakens
So fully had Sinn Fein and the Parliamentary
Party succeeded in sinking their
differences by 18 April that on the following
day the party withdrew from the Offaly
by-election and the Sinn Fein candidate,
Patrick MacCartan, was elected unopposed.
True, the party was having
difficulty in finding a suitable candidate,
and with its defeat a strong probability, it
may have welcomed the opportunity of
making a sacrifice for national unity. Yet
it is inconceivable that without the conscription
crisis it would have shirked a
contest. For a couple of months the Parliamentarians
were de facto abstentionists,
and on Sunday, 5 May, the two leaders,
de Valera and Dillon, spoke from the same
platform at Ballaghadereen. Yet the alliance
did not last long.
On Sunday, 21 April, when the anti-conscription
pledge was being taken
throughout the country, a convention
presided over by the Very Reverend
Father O'Connell, P.P., Cootehill, selected
Arthur Griffith as candidate to contest a
parliamentary vacancy which had just
occurred in East Cavan. Some moves were
made behind the scenes to secure a candidate
who would be acceptable to both
shades of nationalist opinion, and when
these failed, the party selected a local
nominee, J. F. O'Hanlon, and a contest
followed. The election campaign in East
Cavan-long drawn out and often bitterly
fought-which ended only with Griffith's
victory on 21 June, did much to dispel the
friendly atmosphere of April. Before it
got rightly into its stride the "German
Plot" arrests had removed most of the
notable Sinn Fein leaders and it was followed
in July by the return of the Irish party to
the British parliament.
But the East Cavan by-election not only
ended the co-operation between Sinn Féin
and the party, it also led to a deterioration
in the relations between Sinn Fein and the
Hierarchy. Two of the most prominent
speakers for Griffith in Cavan were Father
Michael O'Flanagan, C.C., Crossna, Vice-President
of Sinn Fein and its leader since
the arrest of de Valera and Griffith, and
Doctor Paddy Browne, Professor of Mathematics
in Maynooth College and later, as
Monsignor Padraig de Brun, President of
University College, Galway. Both were
very effective speakers, Doctor Browne's
remark that the Sinn Feiners were "the
anti-conscriptionists with the punch" being
particularly resented by the party leaders.
The Irish Times conm1ented on the election
result by referring to the activities of
"fanatical priests". Because he had contravened
one of the Maynooth Statutes
which laid down that in order to take part
in a public political meeting a priest required
the permission of the parish priest of the
parish in which it was held, Father
O'Flanagan was suspended from his priestly
functions by his bishop, Doctor Coyne of
Elphin. Doctor Browne was summoned to
appear before an episcopal meeting in
Maynooth, but satisfied his superiors that
he had broken no law. The severity of
Father O'Flanagan's punishment created a
feeling among republicans that the law
was being used to silence Sinn Fein sympathisers
among the clergy. Week after
week in the pages of Nationality and New
Ireland the O'Flanagan case was the subject
of articles and controversy, some of it
anti-episcopal in tone. It was claimed that
the Maynooth Statutes were being used
only to keep priests from Sinn Fein platforms
but not from recruiting platforms or
from meetings of the United Irish League.
When news leaked out of a meeting
between Cardinal Logue and the new Viceroy,
Lord French, at the end of June, and
when this meeting was followed shortly
afterwards by the appointment of a Catholic
native of Armagh as Under-Secretary for
Ireland, republican journals made no secret
of their fear that some kind of compromise
on the question of conscription between the
Hierarchy and Dublin Castle was on the
way. An article in New Ireland on 3 August
under the title, Another Secret Treaty?,
traced the sequence of events since April - the
closing of Maynooth, the " No-Popery
campaign" against the bishops and clergy,
the meeting between the Cardinal and
Lord French, the appointment of a Catholic
Under-Secretary, the announcement that
Maynooth would reopen at once, the
charge against Doctor Browne and the
suspension of Father O'Flanagan. The
article proceeded to ask the question:
" Has there been a secret treaty between
Cardinal and Viceroy? Are we to be conscripted,
provided priests, brothers and
clerical students are exempt?" I have seen
no evidence to suggest that anything of
this nature was contemplated, but the very
fact that the question was asked shows that
Sinn Féin's confidence in the Hierarchy's
steadfastness on the conscription issue had
been badly shaken.
6 . Controversy Among The Scholars
One obvious weakness in the bishops'
position on conscription was that as a body
they recognised the Imperial Parliament
as the legitimate civil authority over
Ireland, yet they now found themselves
asserting that a law passed by a large
majority in that parliament could be
resisted by Irish Catholics. Unionists (and
a small number of nationalists of the
Home Rule variety) used this episcopal
dilemma to argue that the bishops should
escape from an untenable position by
abandoning their opposition to conscription
; some republicans used the same
dilemma to argue that the bishops should
reject not only conscription but all British
authority in Ireland.
Three well-known scholars argued vigorously about the theological and ethical
basis of the bishops' opposition to conscription. In an article in the Freeman's
Journal, 14 May, entitled " The Theology
of Resistance", republished in a slightly
modified form in the summer issue of
Studies, Father Peter Finlay, S.J., Professor
of Catholic Theology of the National
University, attempted to provide a historico-theological backing for the bishops'
action. Ireland, he claimed, had never
acquiesced in the Union, which had been
forced upon her and maintained against
her will. In addition, the government of
Ireland under the Union had been administered with gross partiality. Father
Finlay contended that while "Irish Catholics
do not generally deny the right of a London
parliament to make laws for Ireland .. .
they deny that compulsory military service
may ever be imposed by one people upon
another and they claim that Ireland is a
distinct people from Great Britain". This
was an argument which, if tenable, would
suit precisely the position taken up by the
bishops and by the Parliamentary Party,
but it was no more acceptable to the republicans than it was to the unionists. In
fact, it was challenged in the pages of
New Ireland, which not surprisingly pointed
out that if the history of Ireland under the
Union deprived the conscription law of all
moral authority, it did the same to every
law passed for Ireland by the British
parliament.
In an article under the title, The Conscription
Menace in Ireland and Some Issues
Raised By It, in the Irish Ecclesiastical
Record, June 1918, Doctor Peter Coffey,
Professor of Philosophy at Maynooth,
came much nearer to the republican
position. He mentioned three lines on which
resistance to conscription might be justified
in the Irish situation: (1) some scholars
would admit the right of the Westminster
parliament to make ordinary laws and
impose ordinary taxes on Ireland but not
conscription ; (2) others would justly appeal
to historical facts at the Act of Union and
subsequently to claim that no law of the
Imperial Parliament is directly binding on
Irishmen ; (3) others would claim that
England has not now and never has had any
moral right to rule or govern Ireland.
Doctor Coffey's personal sympathy seemed
to be with the third position.
The Irish Theological Quarterly did not
provide its readers with a signed article
on the moral issues raised by conscription,
but the Summer 1918 issue contained some
editorial comments on the question. The
writer seems torn between his personal
support of Ireland's claim to independence
and his acceptance of the legitimacy of the
Westminster Parliament. However, it was
another editor of the Irish Theological
Quarterly, Doctor Walter McDonald, who,
in the following year, made the most
direct onslaught on the bishops' position.
McDonald, in Some Ethical Questions of
Peace and War, devotes several pages to the
conscription question and criticizes strongly
not only the action of the bishops and
the attitudes of Sinn Fein and of the
Parliamentary Party, but also the articles
of Father Finlay and Doctor Coffey. He
expresses his conclusion on the morality
of resistance to conscription as follows :
" ... I cannot see my way to approve of
any such active or passive resistance to a
Government recognised as legitimate as
would leave this exposed to be crushed
by a powerful foreign enemy with whom
it was engaged in a life-and-death struggle
at the time. . . . Opposition to conscription,
in the circumstances, was a
kind of insurrection, to secure a special
form of Home Rule".
Published in 1919 when Ireland was
making heroic efforts to win national
independence, Doctor McDonald's book
was inevitably unpopular with the great
majority of Irish readers, as he took the
view that the Union was for Ireland's
benefit, that Home Rule for the " Celtic"
part of Ireland was the greatest amount of
self-government that Ireland could lawfully
claim, and that no Irish nation had
ever existed in the past. The book caused
pain to many of McDonald's friends and
colleagues, as it seemed so much at variance
with his earlier views, and some of his
admirers attributed it either to his fatal
disease (he died in 1920) or to his longstanding
"episcophobia". Thus in the most
recent issue of Vexilla Regis Monsignor Tom
Fahy, with an admirable sense of loyalty
to his former professor and colleague,
writes of the book as having been produced
by " the delirium of a fevered mind in a
body racked by disease". On re-reading the
book in today's calmer atmosphere I find
it at times exasperating, but see no need
to make allowances for the author's
arguments on the score of health. On the
conscription issue the book argues its case
logically and objectively. It points out the
inconsistency of the bishops' position in
using the legitimacy of the Westminster
Government in order to condemn Irish
revolutionary movements and then rejecting
the right of that Government to pass a
law which is to be applied to Ireland. In
fact, if one were to grant McDonald's
premises concerning Ireland-and here it
is a question of interpreting the facts of
history and economics-his theological and
ethical conclusions could scarcely be faulted.
Whether a book which would be used by
enemies of Ireland against his own country
should have been published by an Irishman
at that critical juncture in our history is,
of course, another matter, and it is in
answering this question in the affirmative
that the author's judgment may have been
clouded by the delirium to which Monsignor Fahy so charitably refers.
7 . Conclusion
When one looks back on the conscription crisis aided by the perspective
which half a century provides, it becomes
immediately obvious that it was one of
the great turning-points of modern Irish
history. If the executions which followed
Easter Week caused the mass of the people
to have qualms about their initial reaction
to the Rising, the conscription crisis was
the second important factor in turning the
population to Sinn Féin. For that reason,
by forcing conscription, even in theory
alone, on an unwilling people, Lloyd
George's government played into the
hands of the republicans and prepared the
way for their overwhelming success in the
General Election at the end of the same year.
Although the spoils from the conscription crisis went to Sinn Féin, however, it is
very doubtful if conscription would have
been defeated without the Church's intervention.
There is a great amount of truth,
therefore, in the recent statement that
Lloyd George was defeated not by Irish
guns but by Irish croziers. No doubt both
Sinn Féin and the Parliamentary Party
would have acted as they did even if the
bishops had not intervened. But the
strongest leadership they could have offered
on their own was increased powerfully
when the Hierarchy stood side by side with
them, if only because thousands of the
ordinary people who feared that resistance
to conscription meant another Easter Week
now found resistance canonized by their
spiritual leaders. Besides, the bishops' intervention
gave to the humdrum of political
meetings and speeches and resolutions the
mystique of a mass - crusade. Thus April
1918 became one of the points during the
struggle for independence-as happened
later during Terence MacSwiney's hunger-strike -
when a certain mood of exaltation
seized the Irish people and when the spiritual
and patriotic sides of the people's character
became almost entirely fused.
But if the bishops' intervention was
apparently necessary for success, it is
doubtful if the bishops alone would have
won the victory. It is no reflection either
on the Hierarchy's patriotism or political
wisdom to suggest that, left to themselves,
they would probably have issued a statement
advising passive resistance on the lines
of the speech made by Cardinal Logue,
already quoted. To be effective against
conscription passive resistance would have
required the wholesale refusal of the R.I.C.
and local authorities to enforce the law,
something which could scarcely be expected
in the circumstances of 1918. It would
seem, therefore, that the intervention of
de Valera, supported by Dillon, at the
Maynooth episcopal meeting was the real
turning-point in strengthening the bishops'
statement, which in turn strengthened the
people's will, and when one recalls his
close co-operation with Archbishop Walsh
(and with the Archbishop's secretary, later
Monsignor Curran) throughout those fateful
days and his drafting beforehand of
the Anti-Conscription Pledge and statement
issued by the Mansion House Conference,
it becomes clearer that de Valera, more
than anyone else, knew precisely what he
wanted as a plan of campaign and won
over, first the Nationalist M.P.s and then
the bishops, to what was basically a Sinn
Fein programme. I cannot say if the episcopal
statement was a compromise one on
which all finally agreed without voting,
or if in fact the inclusion of the phrase
"passive resistance" was pressed to a vote
and defeated. It has been the tradition of
Irish episcopal meetings for the past
century that in case of differences of opinion
a statement representing the views of the
majority of the bishops present is issued in
the name of the whole Hierarchy. By
whichever method it was arrived at, the
statement of April 1918 involved certain
conclusions which some of the
bishops would have found hard to
accept.
It is as a demonstration of the force of
unity, however, that April 1918 is most significant.
While this article dealt with the
Church's part, the roles played by the
nationalist leaders and their followers, by
the local authorities and public bodies, by
the Trade Unions and voluntary organisations
of all kinds, by a section of the
Protestant community in support of the
Catholic majority, by the women side by
side with the men, in short by the people
at large, arc of no less importance, and it
would be a waste of effort to try to estimate
the contribution of each by a counting of
heads or a measuring of activities. April 1918
saw the Irish people more closely united
than any other occasion during the present
century, and if only for this reason alone,
it deserves to be remembered fifty years
after because of its lesson for the present
and the future: Ní neart go cur le cheile.
Anti-Conscription Cartoon, 1918
