In this comment the reference to the
establishment and personnel of the
General Headquarters' Staff is a sequel
to the account of the Irish Volunteer Convention,
October, 1917, (The Capuchin
Annual, 1967). The rest is intended to offer
direction to persons desiring systematically
and fruitfully to consider the events of
1918. It is intended particularly in the idiom.
of the picture-puzzle of our childhood days
to suggest that they "find the people".
Standish O'Grady appealed in his essay,
The Veiled Player, in All Ireland, 1898 :-
"Men of Ireland! Gentry and people,
high and low, wise and simple, leaders
and led, what are you prepared to do
when the Veiled Figure seeing the game
lost, rends the rules, upsets the table,
spills the gold, and shouts for his
'guards'? And he will do it; trust me
he will. For this Veiled Figure is the
genius of a mighty Empire, based upon
the lust for gold and the lust for power".
1898 was a commemorative year.
O'Grady was not concerned with commemoration.
He was reviewing a century
of Ireland's despoliation, destruction, financial
robbery, economic ruin and depopulation
at the hands of the brutal genius of a
mighty Empire. He saw in the remnants of
the race "a new strange Ireland emerging
around us, so eager and inquisitive, and so
willing to be taught." And his soul cried
out to it in a challenge and warning that
was too sadly to come true. By 1913 /14
in the later written words (1959) of an
English historian:-
"The Irish members of the United
Kingdom Parliament for sixty years had
fought for the Home Rule cause according
to the rules of the English game.
When it seemed they were about to win
that game, the English changed its rules."
Five years of dismay, fear, doubt,
tragedy, sacrifice and toil had by 1918
brought the Irish reaction to a consolidation
of organization and will. They were now
to make of the year 1918 as it were a
mapper's Trig-point on the history map,
from which to look back to the days of
disappointed hope in 1912, and forward
to the day of the people's triumph in
July, 1921:-
" They won it", the same English historian has written, " not because they
had superior military force. For England
to 'hold' Ireland in 1922 would have
required the tactics of Strongbow, Essex
and Cromwell combined. England had
bigger forces at her disposal still than
ever Strongbow, Essex and Cromwell
had possessed: but employment of their
tactics was not a practical imperial
policy."
Scattered in mosaic bits or gathered in
the sweeping panorama of slices of century
as our history is being treated today, the
people and their part tend to be submerged
and distorted. Any telling of the story in
truth and in depth will reveal that in 1918
the whole people surfaced in dovetailed
organization and co-ordinated will, and that
they dominated defiantly the political field
for the whole time up to the Triumph.
In January 1918, the people were ready
to answer the O'Grady question. " What
are you prepared to do when. . . ?" The
two Conventions of October, 1917, had
fashioned and planted two great tap-roots
from which a new national movement was
to grow :-a new National Government
which would operate from and in Ireland
to speak and act for the people : and an
armed military force of Volunteers which
would defend the growth of the Parliament
and secure and maintain its prestige and
authority.
By the time November and Christmas,
1917, had passed, the minds of the Sinn Fein
Standing Committee as a whole had been
shaped, and it had settled down to positive
work. Its members looked forward to the
winning, in some near future, of a general
election, and the establishment of a parliament
in Ireland controlled by them ,
with an adequately planned policy for
various aspects of Irish life, and a personnel
capable of operating at government and at
civil service level.
They were proceeding to act as a nascent
government and for that purpose different
members of the Standing Committee had
undertaken responsibility for various departments
of work. A number of reports
under a dozen different headings had been
prepared by them and were ready for
discussion and elaboration by the Standing
Committee as a whole. Of those members
who were connected with the Resident
Executive of the Volunteers, Cathal Brugha
had undertaken to deal with Industries and
Diarmuid Lynch with Food Supply. The
Standing Committee meetings were presided over by Eamon de Valera or Arthur
Griffith, and William T. Cosgrave was
among those invariably in attendance.
In January and February, however, a
number of matters were involving the
Volunteer authority in the danger of
increasing clashes between the police and
the people, and were providing policy
problems for the Standing Committee.
In the war time circumstances, public
difficulties with regard to the food supply
were arising. The British Government
were seeking information about, and taking
control over, certain food stocks. Sinn Fein
activists had stopped the export of dead
meat and oats from Cork ; others wanted
steps taken to have such exports stopped
from Waterford and Rosslare. Diarmuid
Lynch, with the authority of the Standing
Committee on 21 February , and with the
assistance of volunteers stopped the export
of pigs from Dublin Port, took over possession
of a number being driven to the port,
and arranged for their local slaughter and
disposal.
The food position involved the question
of land utilisation; this evoked thoughts
of land ownership and division; and from
this there arose problems causing widespread
activity over the country- cattle-driving,
tree felling, forced entry on land
with horses and ploughs for forced ploughing,
seizure of lands by groups for parcelling
out for either grazing or cropping. This
created local danger of conflict and friction
between different classes in the country,
and between the people and the British
forces. The aggressive attitude of the police
in the resultant clashes gave an impetus
to the tendancy of groups to look for and
raid for arms.
Instructions were issued to all Sinn Fein
cumainn by the Standing Conunittee on 23
February that some of the many cattle drives
appeared to be organized unjustly and
without due regard to circumstances, emphasising
that there was an important
distinction between ranches strictly known
as such, that is land untenanted or non-residential,
and land occupied by relatively
small farmers. It was instructed that no
cumann had authority to organize or
conduct a cattle drive without placing the
facts before the Comhairle Ceanntair and
receiving its sanction, and that in special
cases references might be made to headquarters.
A further urgent instruction was
issued to all Comhairle Ceanntair to see that
all the clubs under their control refrained
from raids for arms in private houses.
In many cases individual Volunteers
including officers found it difficult not to
be involved in agitational movements.
The over-riding interest and responsibility
of the Resident Executive was the organization,
discipline and control of the various
Volunteer units at local level. It was concerned
with the public's appreciation of the
function of the Volunteer organization and
the establishment of its prestige, and of its
own authority in the eyes of both friend
and enemy. It sought to foster popular
cohesion and sustain the defiant spirit of
the people generally; and while developing
1111t1at1ve in action and in resistence to
interference and arrest, to avoid in every
reasonable way giving excuse to the police
authorities for the use of force, particularly
to the extent that might involve an armed
clash.
During the month of February in eight
counties, over seventy arrests had taken
place, and in March in fourteen counties,
more than two hundred and twenty.
The Resident Executive of the Volunteers
was concerned to harmonize the
attitude of the local Volunteer authorities
with the attitude of the Sinn Fein Standing
Committee and the local Sinn Fein bodies,
and to support these. Increasingly it became
important to impress upon the higher
Volunteer officers to disentangle themselves
from responsibilities on the political side
except in so far as their military duties
and responsibilities dictated.
The Volunteers were immediately involved
in the work of a by-election in
South Armagh which was to take place on
the 2 February. A general headquarters
staff had not yet been established, nor a
parliament or government. The radical
change in the immediate national political
objective made at the Sinn Fein Convention
of October 1917, eliminated any feeling in
the Volunteers of their being a party
organization, any more than the Volunteers
had any such feeling in November,
1913, when they subscribed to the terms
of their original constitution and when the
immediate political objective was to secure
under the best possible terms obtainable,
the Home Rule parliament then contemplated.
In the light of the change in the
rules by Britain, a new immediate objective
had been stated in October, 1917.
The work of the Volw1teers in the elections
of Roscommon, Longford, Clare and
Kilkenny in 1917, had in fact been an
operation in the fundamental original spirit
in which they were formed. In the new
circumstances the fact that Doctor Patrick
McCartan was to be the Sinn Fein candidate
in Armagh was both significant and helpful.
He had been prominently identified with
northern and republican affairs, and he was
then in the United States where he had
gone to present to the President of the
United States a letter signed by the prisoners
who had been released from penal servitude
in June 1917, outlining Ireland's claim for
freedom. It seemed appropriate that a voice
from Armagh should be heard abroad, in
time to be understood before a world peace
conference assembled to talk about the
freedom of nations. It was very easy to
answer in Armagh complaints made on
behalf of the opposing candidate that the
Volunteers were a praetorian guard introduced
into the constituency to dominate
and curb the voters. The truth of the
answer was easily sustained that the
political circumstances hitherto existing in
Armagh had prevented the organization of
Irish Volunteers in the area, and had left
public order and public freedom of meeting
unprotected and undefended, and that the
Volunteers were there now only for the
purpose of securing this freedom-and for
all parties.
Volunteers were, therefore, organized
quietly in South Armagh, and they were
supported during the period of the election
by groups of Volunteers drawn from other
parts of the country. Prominent among the
latter were Tomas McCurtain, officer
commanding the Cork brigade, and Dick
McKee, then vice-commandant of the
Dublin brigade. McKee was prominent
among his own Dublin Volunteers as an
organizing, training figure, dominant and
placid in some intense training and peace
patrolling, and, at times, long-striding in
a forced march to some point of danger and
disturbance: McCurtain was versatile and
effective, occupied more perhaps on the
political, publicity and policy aspects of the
election work. For the Volunteers from
outside it was an interesting and instructive
experience in the political arena. For all
of them, new and seasoned, the assignment
mixed some of the contact-making of the
internment camp days with military discipline
and training, and with some public
relations' experience under circumstances
which called for good humour, tolerance
and patience in dealing with the excitements
and antagonisms of party election
conflict. It re-created, in new circumstances
and at the beginning of a critical year's
work, the lively, sanguine atmosphere of
the post-internment, and post-Lewes
gatherings of the summer days at the East
Clare and Kilkenny by-elections, and at the
Gaelic League Oireachtas at Waterford. It
gave opportunity for the practical application
of the training received in an important
area of the Volunteer scheme of
organization.
In the meantime, in the middle of
necessary week to week activities, the
Volunteer Resident Executive like the
Sinn Fein Standing Committee was thinking
in terms of the future and of long
distance policy. It had decided that it would
be advisable that the national executive
should appoint a general headquarters' staff,
which while continuing to act under the
policy control of the Resident Executive,
and the quasi-ministerial direction of Cathal
Brugha as its chairman, would be geared
for and fully authorised to deal with the
organization, discipline and equipment of
an armed force. The Resident Executive
invited the military directors to prepare
proposals for submission to a meeting of
the National Executive which was called
for the early part of March at the Dublin
Typographical Society's rooms at 35 Lower
Gardiner Street. The evening before, a
small group met at the Keating Branch of
the Gaelic League, 46 Parnell Square, to
frame their recommendations. Present
were:-Michael Collins, Rory O'Connor,
Dick McKee, Diarmuid O'Hegarty, Sean
McMahon, Michael Staines and myself. It
was easy to decide that the staff wanted a
Chief-of-Staff, Adjutant General, Quartermaster-
General, Director of Training and
Director of Engineering. Availability was
as important as suitability. It was simple
to decide that Rory O'Connor who was
an engineer attached to the Dublin Corporation
would be Director of Engineering,
and that Sean McMahon who was attached
to the office of Nationality would, because
of his Dublin brigade and Dublin Port
area associations be Quartermaster General.
The allocation of the other appointments
would depend upon who would be Chief-of-
Staff and he would be either Collins or
Mulcahy. Collins had come specially to
Dublin from London in January 1916, because
of the pending Rising. From his
arrival he was deeply involved in the quiet
preparations for it. He was as quietly
connected with the Kimmage garrison at
that time who also had come back from
Britain. He was particularly closely associated
with the West Cork group in the
Keating Branch, who were a Gaelic
League-Volunteer- I.R.B. impregnated
group. He was very quietly active but
inconspicuous in camp activities in
Frongoch, where ill-considered prominence
might bring the "conscriptables", of whom
he was one, under the notice of the British
camp authorities who were viciously and
persistently searching for them there. On
return to Dublin after Frongoch he was
immersed in multiple diverse activities and
very effectively placed for these by reason
of his position as secretary of the Irish
Prisoners' Dependants' Fund. On the return
of the Lewes men, he was immediately in
active public cooperation with Ashe, but
only came prominently into general public
view when, over Ashe's grave, it was his
function to raise his voice in accompaniment
to a rifle volley with the words "that
volley which we have just heard is the only
speech which it is proper to make above
the grave of a dead Fenian".
After Frongoch, I on the other hand
had been out of Dublin for some months in
Cork until after the return of the Lewes
men. I was, however, the active, if very
junior, product of a Dublin brigade
company from. the beginning, and my
contact with it and particularly with Ashe
during the Rising was such that, on his
death, I was given charge of the organization
of his funeral, in the process of which
the post-Rising reconstruction of the
Dublin brigade took place, and I became
the Brigade Commanding Officer. Somewhere,
there was an underlying logic which
decided that I would be Chief-of-Staff
The decision was taken in a conversational
atmosphere, Diarmuid O'Hegarty remarking
"not that either of ye would be much
of a Chief-of-Staff, so it doesn't matter
anyway". Collins then became Adjutant-General
and Director of Organization, and
Dick McKee, who was Officer Commanding
the second battalion of the Dublin
brigade, became Director of Training as
well as becoming Officer Commanding of
the Dublin brigade in my stead.
In the developing situation this was to
bring heavy responsibilities on McKee but
as we moved together up Granby Row
after the meeting, Dick's feeling was one
of comparative relief. He was relieved that
Collins was not to be the Chief-of-Staff
He had not had very much experience of
Collins and he was rather afraid of his
impetuosity. The decisions come to were
to prove most fortunate and fruitful. The
subsequent companionship of Collins and
McKee in work and danger must be one
of the great companionships of our period.
It resembled that of Tomas McCurtain and
Terence MacSwiney in their own Cork
sphere. Linking as it did in the heart of
Dublin the striking force of the Dublin
brigade and the information and striking
force associated directly with Collins, the
Collins-McKee companionship was the core
of that aggressive defence which saved our
political leadership, Dáil and Government,
from complete destruction by assassination
at the hands of the British special murder
forces organized and let loose on Ireland
in the years 1920 and '21. For Collins too
it was a fortunate arrangement as coming
events were immediately to open up for
him greatly expanding spheres of administrative and political work and burden
him with ever increasing responsibilities.
When the National Executive of the
Volunteers met on the following night, our
proposals were unanimously accepted. The
General Headquarters' Staff was constituted
and suitably empowered and the appointments
made : Chief-of-Staff: Richard
Mulcahy; Adjutant-General and Director of
Organization: Michael Collins; Quartermaster
General: Sean McMahon; Director
of Training: Dick McKee; Director of
Engineering: Rory O'Connor.
Two matters may appropriately be
mentioned here. At the conventions in
October 1917 Austin Stack was elected one
of the honorary secretaries of Sinn Fein
and one of the Munster representatives on
the National Executive of the Volunteers.
He had been in jail from 15 August until
sometime in November 1917, when during
a hunger strike he was temporarily released
under the cat-and-mouse act. He had been
prominently involved in jail disturbances
and in hunger strikes. He had not been
present at our executive meetings, and it
was, therefore, as an afterthought when the
executive had approved of the personnel
of the Staff that it occurred to me to suggest
that I would like to have Austin associated
with it. A honorary secretary of Sinn Fein
he would be a useful liaison; he would have
no assigned staff duties but there would be
occasions when I might usefully employ
him as my deputy. This was agreed to.
Very shortly afterwards, in April, he was
rearrested and only returned to Ireland
after his rescue from Manchester jail
eighteen months later, in October 1919.
He then took over the post of Minister for
Home Affairs which had been kept open
for him. There, as a member of the Cabinet
he was a colleague of Brugha and Collins,
but he had no part in the work of Headquarters'
staff
The second point is that within a fortnight
of my becoming Chief-of-Staff I
called one evening on Cathal Brugha at
his office in Ormand Quay at about 8 p.m.
just to make contact with him. I had no
special business to discuss. He was seated
at his table when I entered the room and I
was completely surprised to be met by an
explosion of some pent up feeling demanding
what I knew of some shooting incident
with the police which had apparently
taken place in County Cork. The question
was followed immediately by the violent
assertion that such work would bring
destruction on the people, and that he,
Cathal, would immediately summon the
National Executive of the Volunteers and
would make whoever was responsible
answer before them for his action. I had
thought it indisputable that we all had a
complete understanding of the limitations
and responsibilities of the Volunteers. This
was a Cathal I had not known before and
I was completely non-plussed. I had not
heard anything about such an incident,
and before I had been able to convey
more than that Austin Stack entered the
room. If Austin sensed any of the atmosphere
of the room, he showed no sign of
concern or interest, but stood like somebody
who had come purposefully and by
appointment. I was content to make way
for him and in a different atmosphere
perhaps find out something of what
happened in Cork. I never in fact did find
out. Because of his close contact with West
Cork I asked Collins if he knew anything
of it. He told me that he had written to
Torn. Hales and that Tom had replied that
the local sergeant had gone out of his way
some place to interfere with some of the
local boys, and that " the sergeant lost his
prestige". It could have been the successful
raid on the police barracks at Eyries, County
Cork, from which some rifles were taken.
Before long, on 12 April, in an unsuccessful
raid on Gortatlea barracks, County Kerry,
two volunteer lost their lives. There was
no further reference to either of these
incidents by Cathal, because a changed
situation had arisen which caused him to
develop radical ideas of his own.
The British man-power bill had been
introduced into the British House of
Commons on 9 April, and in the discussion
it had been indicated that the bill would
apply to Ireland. On 16 April, the day the
bill was passed into law, the Irish Parliamentary
Party withdrew from Westminster
and came back to Ireland to fight
conscription. On 18 April, the Mansion
House Conference was set up. Cathal
had come to a very definite decision as to
the part he intended to play. He asked me
to get him some Volunteers willing to go
to London with him on dangerous work.
His intention was that immediately the first
positive act had taken place in Ireland to
attempt to put conscription into force, he
would personally lead an attack on the
individual members of the British Government
responsible. He would make the plans
himself and he would deal directly and
personally with the persons volunteering
to go from Ireland. He would arrange with
trusted organisers in England. There was
no room for discussion of the matter and
at that moment there was no necessity.
Volunteers came forward and after Cathal
had interviewed them, he set out for
London and was there by 30 April to
plan and await developments. Such was
the intensity of his appreciation of what a
disaster for Ireland an attempt to enforce
conscription here would be, that he could
think of no other way in which he could
adequately express himself or hope to be
effective. He had had to absent himself
from meetings of the Standing Committee
of Sinn Féin from. the beginning of the
year because of the condition of his health,
and his resignation from the committee
was reluctantly accepted on 22 April. He
remained in Britain until October.
Immediately after the formation of the
General Headquarters' Staff a by-election
in East Tyrone was pending and the polling
due to take place on 4 April. The Volunteer
activities there would follow the same
pattern as in South Armagh ; the occasion
would be used to recruit new members and
to strengthen the Volunteer organization ;
to secure the fullest freedom of public
meeting and effective hearing for speakers ;
and to improve generally the atmosphere
of election activity. For that purpose -as
in South Armagh and in the 1917 byelections -
a number of officers and small
contingents of Volunteers from adjoining
constituencies and from some distant parts
of the country attended during a great
part of the election period.
I proposed to spend the period of the
by- election in East Tyrone. As I passed by
Earlsfort Terrace on the way to catch a
train to Dungannon, I met Ernie O'Malley
outside the main entrance to University
College. I knew Ernie as a Volunteer and
as a medical student. (I had myself become
a first year medical student the previous
autumn and Ernie was a third year student).
A few words with Ernie showed that he
was very depressed. Something had gone
wrong with his studies and he foresaw
possible difficulties in continuing them ..
I told him where I was going and what I
was doing and suggested that he could be
of very great use to us in Tyrone where
he would have plenty of interesting work
to do in good company. I suggested that a
change of surroundings would help him
while he was settling down to solve his
immediate personal troubles. I asked him
to see Dick McKee at once and that Dick
would be very happy to send him along
the following day with son1e of his Dublin
men. Next day Ernie joined me at Dungannon where, based on the Coalisland
district, he began some very useful work
and where within a few days a number of
hidden pre-1916 guns were unearthed.
These were a very welcome and stimulating
accessory to good, quiet, training exercises
and instruction. On his return to Dublin
he became a member of the organization staff
The Tyrone election result was
Harbinson 1,802; Milroy 1,222. The comments
of accusers and critics on the Volunteer
work was that Sinn Féin peace patrols
were in evidence in Tyrone on a scale even
more formidable than in other elections
with the possible exception of East Clare,
and were responsible for a success which
put the Sinn Féin poll at a figure never
dreamt of by the most ardent Sinn Féiners.
The South Armagh result, on 2 February,
had been Donnelly 2,324 ; McCartan 1,305;
Richardson 40. Polling day was on 1
February.
An example of the difficulties we were
running into at that time is shown by the
fact that immediately after sending
O'Malley to Tyrone, both McKee, the
Commanding Officer of the Dublin brigade
and Oscar Traynor the vice-commanding
officer were arrested, on 18 March, and
sentenced to three months in jail ; while on
the day after the East Tyrone polling Collins
was arrested after a struggle in Bachelor's
Walk, Dublin, on a charge of having made,
earlier , a speech in Longford. In spite of
an attempt at rescue by a crowd in Dublin ,
he was brought to Brunswick Street
police station, and on trial a few days later
in Longford after some dramatic exchanges
with the court, spurning the authority of
the courts in every way and refusing the
giving of bail, he was removed to Sligo
jail to await there trial at the Circuit
Court in July. Within a few days, however,
threatening clouds had caused Sligo friends
to give the bail. By July the situation had
so developed that Collins's freedom made
the forfeiting of the bail worth while.
Immediately after the result in the East
Tyrone election the situation changed dramatically and radically. First there came the
proceedings in the British Parliament which
brought Ireland within the scope of the
conscription proposals of the man power
bill. From the beginning of the year there
had been a certain amount of rumbling and
threatening about completing the conscription
plan in Britain and extending
conscription to Ireland. The proposal
to extend conscription to Ireland left so
many things to the imagination that there
was no great conviction in Ireland that it
would or could be attempted. The terms
of the bill and the declarations by the British
prime minister in the second reading debate
on 9 April, that it would be applied to
Ireland brought realization here of real
danger. The fact that the passing of the
bill did not automatically apply its terms
to Ireland and that a special order of council
by the government would be required
before this could happen left many doubts
in the people's minds about possible
British plans, preparedness and the freedom
and ability of the British Government ever
to apply it. The intention to do so appeared
real enough if the Government thought it
could succeed.
The Standing Committee of Sinn Féin,
on 18 April, agreed that Mr. Eamon de
Valera and Mr. Arthur Griffith as president
and vice-president of Sinn Fein were at
liberty to accept the invitation of the Lord
Mayor of Dublin to meet the Irish party
representatives, trade council representatives
and others to form a national policy to
defeat the conscription menace, and at the
conference in the Mansion House on the
same day the Mansion House Anti-Conscription
Committee was formed under the
chairmanship of Eamon de Valera to
stimulate, control and direct the national
resistence to conscription.
The chairman and representatives of the
committee attended a meeting of the
Catholic hierarchy in Maynooth College
on the same day to inform the hierarchy
of the formation of the committee, and of
the committee's proposed approach to their
responsibilities : they sought the understanding
and support of their Lordships
in their task of directing and safeguarding
the people in the threatening difficult
circumstances.
From their meeting the bishops issued
the following manifesto:
"We consider that conscription forced
in this way upon Ireland is an oppressive
and inhuman law which the Irish people
have a right to resist by every means
that are consonant with the law of God."
What was tantamount to National
Government had been brought into being
composed of Eamon de Valera and Arthur
Griffith (Sinn Fein), John Dillon and
Joseph Devlin (Irish Parliamentary Party),
William O'Brien, Michael Egan and
Thomas Johnson (Trade Unions and
Labour) and William O'Brien and T. M .
Healy (All for Ireland League). They
presented to the people as a whole an urgent
and over-riding national objective.
The Conference forthwith issued a statement
that the passage of the conscription
bill must be regarded as a declaration of
war on the Irish nation, that the attempt
to enforce it would be an unwarrantable
aggression which should be resisted by all
Irishmen by the most effective means at
their disposal. A form of pledge was
prepared and arrangements made that it
should be taken publicly and solemnly in
every parish in the country on the following
Sunday. The pledge's terms were:-
"Denying the right of the British to
enforce compulsory service in this
country, we pledge ourselves solemnly
to one another to resist conscription by
the most effective means at our disposal."
The national taking of the pledge of
resistence was enthusiastically carried out
over the whole country on Sunday, 21
April: a general stoppage of work throughout
the country, on 23 April, demonstrated
the enthusiasm and readiness of all the
workers and of the commercial and
economic community to give their support
to the national intention and effort.
It was one thing to accept and elevate
the organization of an effort to defeat
conscription as the over-riding and urgent
national objective; it was another thing for
the Mansion House Conference or any
other body to suggest or plan the people's
form of resistence. In the days leading up
to the introduction of the man power bill,
and preceeding the formation of the
Mansion House Conference, much had
been suggested in public communications
of various kinds as to the way of dealing
with the danger. It seems therefore relevan1
and important to recall here a letter on
16 April, published by His Grace the Most
Reverend Doctor Walsh, Archbishop of
Dublin. It should help to bring to our mind:
the picture of the people at that time and
their dilemma, while at the same time
marking the dilemma of all those who
impelled by the responsibilities attaching
to their position or by a sense of public duty
would seek to direct and help the people
His Grace desired to:
"Call attention to vital and important
points that have been to a large measure
obscured if not hidden away out of
sight in the floods of vague declamation
that are at present deluging this country
I. Suppose the ministry mad enough
to put the present conscription bill into
force, or even keep it on the statute book
as a standing menace, what practical
action are the people of this country to
take in order to meet the crisis. Or to
put it in another way, can any individual
amongst us find in any of the countless
resolutions that arc being passed, and
clear or intelligible indication of what
he or she is pledged to do or is advised
to do if conscription is put into force.
2. There is another and no less important point. A view is now being put
forward which in the cant of the day may
fairly be described as 'camouflage'. The
point thus raised is as to whether a home
rule bill for Ireland-or as the official
leader of the House of Commons put it
a few days ago, a Local Government Bill
for Ireland should not be introduced into
parliament before the conscription bill
is passed into law, or at any event,
before that measure is put into force.
Now I may of course be mistaken, the
introduction into Parliament of even the
most satisfactory home rule bill that
could be devised would not in the
present state of angry feeling in Ireland
contribute in the slightest degree to the
pacification of our country.
I hope I am not mistaken in taking for
granted that when any Irish nationalist
seems to regard with favour the coupling
of the Conscription Bill with home rule,
he must have in contemplation, not a
home rule bill that may have been merely
introduced into the Imperial Parliament
and that may never become law but, a
Home Rule Bill that has actually been
passed into law and has moreover
brought into existence an Irish Parliament, and that the only Conscription
Bill he contemplates is one framed by
that parliament and passed by it into
law."
The picture of the people and of their
dilemma is added to by the implication of
the words of Doctor Hallinan, Bishop of
Limerick, successor to Doctor O'Dwyer,
in a letter of 15 April, written to the mayor
on the occasion of a big demonstration in
Limerick:
"Stand erect, close up your ranks, put
your backs to the wall, shout at the top
of your voices-and let your voices
be in unison-on no account are we
Irishmen going to consent to military
conscription by the British Government
of this country."
And by the word of the Reverend
Joseph Brady, Administrator, Parochial
House, Armagh, on 12 April:
"The methods employed however will
not be those sanctioned by Sir Edward
(Carson) namely, arms, drilling etc.
The constitutional weapon of passive
resistance employed so successfully by
thousands of conscientious objectors in
England, Scotland and Wales for years
recently will be quite sufficient, and we
have the highest theological authority
for its use. But there is no time to be
lost."
I take the words of churchmen the more
clearly and simply to suggest the picture
of the people and their uncertainties.
As just one lay political note I recall
this small leader by Arthur Griffith in
Nationality of l3 April:
Conscription
"England is again breathing conscription
of Irish manhood. Don't worry!"
Immediately on my return from Tyrone,
on 3 April, I was laid low by a very
aggressive attack of lumbago. The members
of the General Headquarters' Staff, other
than Collins who had been arrested, met
in my bedroom at Fernside, Upper Drumcontra
where, later, Professor John Carolan
was murdered by Crown forces. Mr. de
Valera and Cathal Brugha attended as
president and chairman of the Resident
Executive of the Volunteers. The purpose
of the meeting was to review and confirm
an understanding as to the policy of the
General Headquarters' Staff in the likely
position foreshadowed by the pending
introduction of the man power bill on
9 April. It was agreed that there was no
present necessity to make any change.
Hitherto the position was that Volunteers
were required to take all possible precaution
to avoid arrest, and even to avoid creating
occasions that invited disorder and the
danger of the use of force. If arrested they
had orders to be defiant of authority and
non-cooperative on detention. If, while in
possession of arms their arrest was attempted,
the arms should be used in an effort
to prevent their loss and to evade being
taken into custody.
It was a matter of constitution and of
practice that the General Headguarters'
Staff was subservient to the over-riding
authority of a purely political body. There
was a dual safety catch in this principle.
The Staff was established by a democratically
elected body, the National Convention
of the Volunteers; it was established
to serve the purposes and policy of a
democratically established political body - the
National Executive of Sinn Féin. There
was, if necessary, the further safeguard
that as men worthy of being entrusted
with the responsibility of organising an
armed force, they were persons who would
understand that such a force could achieve
any normally intended purpose only
through the operation of the political
body whose strength required its support.
At the moment of the talk there was
no forecasting of the retirement of the
Irish party from Westminster nor of the
formation of the Mansion House Conference.
Once the Mansion House Conference
had come together it was easy for
the General Headquarters' Staff and the
Volunteers generally to understand that
their function now would be to serve the
objectives and the requirements of that
Conference as the authoritative directing
political body. That body would be entitled
to direct at high level the control
and the use of arms in relation to its
responsibilities and policy. Naturally, no
more than the General Headquarters' Staff
(except by prudence and precaution) could
the Mansion House Conference expect to
control at the fringe of local events all
danger of forceful clashes.
The drama of the formation of the all-party
Mansion House Conference brought
vividly home to the people the presence
of a real danger. The members of the
Conference faced a very unpredictable
task and a serious responsibility. They
foresaw the possibility of an attempted
round up of the young men of the country
for conscription and military service in
Europe, an event which would be utterly
destructive of the economic and social
life of Ireland, and fraught with the danger
of bloodshed and loss of life. On the other
side, there were the militarists and pressmen
in Britain who professed to see conscription
of Ireland as a task that could effectively
be done. They held that the men so collected
in Ireland could easily be removed to
France and "could easily be dealt with
there". Every other political and social
consideration was submerged by the Conference's
call to "resist conscription" which
demanded a national stand to attention and
a waiting for inspiration and direction.
On II May, Field Marshal Sir John
French (Earl of Ypres) as Lord Lieutenant
and Mr. Shortt as Chief Secretary came to
Ireland to start the new campaign. They
replaced Lord Wymbourne and Mr. Duke.
French was going to apply conscription to
Ireland, that is, if he was let, that is, if
some of the people he served did not find
out that in their own and Britain's interest
this would be imprudent. He came to face
a people mobilised in indignation, dangerously
calm and energised by angry scorn.
No sword in the service of the brutal
genius of Empire can have played a more
despicable part or more heavily have
earned the scorn of an O'Grady than that
of Field Marshal Sir John French from the
time of his arrival in Ireland on 11 May,
1918 until the day he left it on l April,
1921, when he was no longer able to conceal,
or make effective, the work of the
murder machine strategy he had helped
to plan and use in the service of his masters.
A chronicle of some of the principal
events and their consequences may imply
his intentions and disclose their results,
and portray his failure during 1918 in
Ireland:
I. 17/18 May: Attempt to crush Sinn Fein
by sudden arrests of most of its leaders
and of many hundreds of its active workers
throughout the country.
2. 3 June: Postponement of intended
enforcement of conscription for a period
of five months to October.
3. 13 June: Thirteen Irish counties and two
cities scheduled as proclaimed districts, the
better to invent crime and inflict
punishment.
4. 21 June : In East Cavan by-election the
Irish Parliamentary candidate constrained
to declare the immediate object of party
policy as "opposition to abstention with all
the resources of the party". Sinn Fein won
by 3,785 votes to 2,581 votes.
5. 25 June: Concurrently Lord Wymbourne,
the recently superseded Lord
Lieutenant, declared in the House of Lords
that " conscription was now a physical
impossibility" : while Lord Curzon declared
that " home rule was dead, and conscription
was impossible".
6. 26 June: Parliamentary Party forecast
their early return to Westminster on some
suitable opportunity.
7. 4 July: Many Irish societies and organisations
declared by order to be dangerous
assoc1at1ons.
8. 5 July: Order for whole of Ireland
prohibiting all public meetings, processions
and games except on permits by police:
later order prohibited the publication in
press of speeches made at meetings held
without such permits.
9. 16 July : Mansion House Conference
adjourned.
IO. 17 July : Irish Parliamentary Party
ordered by its secretaries to return to Westminster
on 23 July.
II. 30 July: Motion by Mr. Dillon in the
House of Commons calling for the removal
of the proposal to conscript Irishmen
defeated. The one hundred and six Irish
members received support from only
fifty non-Irish members. Later Mr. Shortt
declined to give any information to the
Irish members on the Government's intention
with regard to conscription (8
August).
12. 4 August: Large attendances at vast
array of hurling matches organised by the
Gaelic Athletic Association throughout the
country.
15 August: 1,800 public political meetings
similarly organised by Sinn Féin.
ln this way the Irish people, generally,
added a companion chapter to that already
provided on "defiance and disdain" in
the jails and camps as an offering for further
contemplation by the conscriptionists. It
was the people's month.
For the Volunteers the month was
marked by a set back. The 100,000 rounds
of ammunition brought from Belfast for
the Volunteers to Dublin were captured.
13. 19 September: The date of a possible
general election was brought closer in the
minds of the people by the publication in
Griffith's paper, Nationality, of the first
list of general election candidates selected
by Sinn Fein.
26 September: At the conference in
Dublin the Irish Parliamentery Party began
their election preparations and published
a party declaration of the policy upon
which they would stand or fall in any
future political conflict in Ireland.
14. 7 October: A German communication to the United States invited President
Wilson to take up the question of bringing
about peace.
12 October : In an atmosphere of mixed
and fretful rumour about war, ending of
war, conscription and possible parliamentary
dissolution , the Mansion House Conference
met again and for some hours discussed
"practical proposals for resistence to conscription".
15. 2 November : At a special session the
Irish Trade Union Congress and Labour
party it was decided to withdraw all
Labour's candidates in the circumstances
of the pending election, " in the hope that
the democratic demand for self-determination
to which the Irish Labour party and
its candidates give the most unqualified
adherence will thereby obtain their freest
chance of getting expression at the polls".
The signing of the armistice and the end
of the war on 11 November, brought the
year 1918 rushing to a close. The British
Parliament was dissolved in ten days time,
on 21 November, there followed a general
election with nomination day fixed for
4 December, and polling day on 14
December. The result for the Irish constituencies
was: Sinn Fein won seventy-three
seats; The Irish Parliamentary Party
six and the Unionists twenty-six.
The members elected for Sinn Féin, who
were not in prison, assembled at the
Mansion House, Dublin on 21 January,
1919, established Dáil Eireann as the Irish
Parliament, appointed as its President
Cathal Brugha, and made an appropriate
declaration of independence in the name
of the Irish Republic. Meeting again on 22
January it approved of the President's
nominations of ministers.
Sinn Féin thereby consolidated its
achievements during 1918 by constituting
the Dáil in January 1919 and appointing
as the ministry; President, Cathal Brugha;
Finance Minister, Eoin McNeill ; Home
Affairs, Michael Collins; Foreign Affairs,
Count Plunkett; National Defence, Richard
Mulcahy.
I am suggesting that the year 1918 is an
important observation date on our hi story
map and that it is an important exercise, if
history is to serve any purpose, to "find the
people" in the development, and their
contribution to that year's events. Two
aspects arc important: the swarming of the
people themselves in such vast numbers in
December 1918 and the leadership that
they evolved, and that these leaders came
together and established a government.
It is not suggested that the cares, dangers
and difficulties of 1968 can afford to be
neglected by commemorative concern for
1918. It is rather suggested that 1968
provides a long period during which even
superficial thinking and superficial questioning will find the people's story written on
the surface.
The swarming of 1918 was a many
generation swarming: many different layers
of society moved to its gathering. Some,
Standish O'Grady had envisioned and
valued and queried in 1898. Some, Griffith
had taught from 1900, and in 1908 encouraged
the people with thoughts of what
a 1918 could bring, though he could not
have foreseen the quality of the bringing.
Many saw Pearse standing alongside
Redmond in 1912. Others saw Tom Clarke
standing with Pearse in 1916. Others saw
McNeill standing with de Valera in 1917·
All saw and understood the spirit in
which, in April 1918, John Dillon, Redmond
's successor, became repatriated to
serve in a national danger, in a movement
with a tradition that was deep and generous
and loyal.
Labour's pre-election declaration on 2
November was recognised to be an expression
of an appeal coming from all
parts of Ireland for the same degree of
unity in the statement of Ireland's demand
for independence as was presented on the
conscription issue.
In the circumstances of our struggle
years, leadership capacity was widely
spread and well developed in depth. It
was a product of the people. In the circumstances of 1918 at Political Party-Volunteer
level a certain dovetailing took place in a
manner that was to establish and secure
from the beginning Government- Army
relations. The popular surge to fight the
conscription issue brought large numbers
into the ranks of the Volunteers. The
casing off of the crisis reduced the numbers
but left with the organisation many new
men of quality. The circumstances arising
from the removal of the chief political
leaders of Sinn Féin and of some of its
most active workers throughout the
country brought the fabric of Volunteer
officers and men into closer integration with
the leadership and the rank and file on the
local political side. It did this without disturbing
organisation or discipline in the
Volunteer fabric itself or blurring the
Volunteers' sense of their special function.
The selection of candidates in mid September
marked a greater integration still.
At what was to be government level this
integration had special significance.
Among the first group of candidates
selected in September were, for South Cork,
Michael Collins, Adjutant-General and
Director of Organisation, and for County
Waterford, Cathal Brugha, Chairman of
the Resident Executive of the Volunteers.
In October, l was, while Chief-of-Staff,
selected for the Clontarf constituency to
replace Harry Boland who had earlier been
selected there but had subsequently accepted
an invitation to stand for South Roscommon. Both Cathal Brugha and Collins
had been elected in October 1917 as members
of the Sinn Féin Executive. Cathal
Brugha had done some work on the framing
of a policy for Industries, and Michael
Collins had attended a meeting of the
Standing Committee on the night of 17
May in advance of the arrests that night of
the organisation's leaders. Neither of them
Signatures of some of the 1918 leaders.
had however, attended any formal meeting
of the Standing Committee during the year
until November, when, in the circumstances of the general election, we three
were drawn into its councils. This was the
fusing at spearhead of the two instruments
of power which had developed and worked
effectively in parallel from the two conventions of October 1917. A people was
being equipped to have its voice heard.
A shadow loomed large over Ireland,
a dark agent of tyranny, that was to be
removed-the shadow of Sir John French,
Earl of Ypres-and his sword. It remained
to overshadow a period which was later to
be described, on 15 February 1962, by an
English historian as: "in the record of
British history one of its most disgraceful
Chapters.”
