Early Irish manuscripts are deservedly
renowned for their art, one of them,
the Book of Kells, being, perhaps, the
best-known book in the whole world. The
Book of Kells must not be thought of as a
unique phenomenon, isolated among the
world's early manuscripts, but, rather, as
the finest example in a whole series of
illuminated manuscripts, all of which are
either directly or indirectly associated with
early Christian Ireland. Artistically, the
Book of Kells is deservedly placed on the
apex of a very high pinnacle, but we must
never forget that it has that place of esteem
only as a result of the work of generations
of artists', each of whom contributed something
towards its achievement. Furthermore,
although it could be interpreted as
the culmination of years of innovation,
change, and conservation in Irish art, its
achievement did not mark the termination
of such work; many finely illuminated
manuscripts emanated from Irish scriptoria
during the centuries following. All these
illuminated manuscripts are decorated in an
art-style which is popularly called "Celtic",
a term which is somewhat inaccurate if
taken literally but which can be acceptable
if it is the interpretation rather than the
content which is in question. It is this long-lived
art-style which we are going to
examine here, following its progression
from its beginning in the late sixth century
to the end of the Viking period.
Thanks to the fact that the Roman
legions never reached Ireland, this country
was truly Celtic, both in fact and in spirit,
when Christianity was introduced during
the fifth century. The Irish, therefore, were
the last truly Celtic people who remained
completely independent, and were thus
very different from all others. This is the
fundamental reason why the art found in
our early illuminated manuscripts is so very
different from that in other European,
Asian, and North African manuscripts of
approximately the same date.
The Celts were a people who spread over
most of Europe during the last five
centuries before the birth of Christ. They
are identifiable not only by their language,
political and social customs, weapons, tools,
dress, and other artifacts, but above all by
their art. This art seems to have developed
in the Celtic homeland, somewhere north
and north-west of the Alps. Its basis was, of
course, the mainly geometric, abstract art
already found among the proto-Celtic
tribes in the area. This proto-Celtic art is
not very inspiring and is of such a simple,
rather primitive type that it can hardly be
rightly called an art-style. It differs little in
general feeling and execution from the
non-representional art of many primitive
peoples of all ages and areas. Nonetheless,
it did provide the Celtic artists with something
to build on.
Racial traits have a way of surviving all
sorts of attempts to curb them, and those
of the early Celts on the Continent can be
found among the Irish Celts of the early
historic period, just as they often come to
the surface among the present-day Irish,
Scots, Manx, Welsh, Cornish and Breton
peoples. One of these Celtic traits is a love
of drink, and it has been said that Celtic
art largely owes its origin to Celtic thirst.
This is not to suggest that Celtic art derives
from the drunken hallucinations of Celtic
craftsmen, but merely to indicate the main
source of inspiration which provided the
impetus to the development of their
primitive geometric art: the decoration on
the bronze vessels in which the "precious"
liquid was imported from the Mediterranean
world. These vessels were often decorated
with Graeco-Etruscan motifs which appealed
to the Celtic artist. However, the appeal
was a qualified one and another characteristic
Celtic trait came to the fore, that of
adaptation of a foreign idea rather than its
adoption. The willingness to adapt rather
than adopt, to absorb rather than be
absorbed, is a characteristic which lasted all
through the history of the Celts and one
which is a primary feature of early Irish
illumination.
Other non-Celtic elements, besides those
of the Classical Mediterranean world,
which played a part in the evolution and
development of early Celtic art, include
motifs derived from Scythian and Eastern
art-styles. These motifs, too, were adapted
and absorbed into the Celtic repertoire, and
by the mid-fifth century B.C. the Celts
possessed what has been termed "the first
conscious art-style to be created in Europe
north of the Alps".
Celtic art developed over the centuries,
and many recognisable phases and local
styles can be identified, but throughout,
several characteristic features always remain
present.
It is curvilinear rather than rectilinear,
asymmetrical yet balanced, sometimes geometric
yet not rigidly so, abstract yet sometimes
semi-representational, over-indulgent
yet controlled, barbaric yet sophisticated,
ever willing to absorb new motifs and ideas
yet never willing merely to copy them.
There is a general tendency to geometricize
what is zoomorphic, and to zoomorphize
what is geometric: bosses and swirling
curves often give the impression of a human
or animal face peering out of the ornament,
and one can seldom be certain whether the
artist has deliberately transformed the face
into the design or vise versa. There is an air
of mystery about it all, and it is clear that
the Classical ideal of almost photographic
and life-like reproduction was anathema
to the Celt. To the Celts, the overall
design or pattern was of primary importance.
In general terms, the Celt decorated
a surface, that is, ornamented what was
already present so as to make it more
pleasing. Celtic art, though not always
merely decorative, is seldom descriptive - it
is truly an art for Art's sake.
This was the art which existed in Ireland
when Christianity arrived. The early
missionaries, Saint Patrick and others, were
concerned with spreading the Gospel and
not with overthrowing the existing culture,
with the result the christianization of
Ireland did not alter excessively the Celtic
character of the people nor, of course,
their approach to art. Rather, once the new
religion became established, the Church
acted as a patron of the arts, providing the
artists with fresh inspiration and introducing
them to new ideas and techniques.
Though possessed of immense learning
and of an oral literature, formidable in
quantity as well as quality, the Celts never
possessed the knowledge of writing and, in
consequence, knew nothing of books.
Books were, however, almost a sine qua non
of Christianity, and we can be certain that
even the first missionaries to Ireland
brought books with them. The concept of
the written word was soon appreciated by
the Irish, particularly amongst those converted
to Christianity, and before long
books were being written in the Irish
monasteries. None of these very early books
remain today, but by comparison with the
fifth-century Latin manuscripts known
from Gaul and Italy, undoubtedly similar
to those brought to Ireland by the early
111.issionaries, it seems reasonable to suppose
that they were not very elaborately ornamented.
Some of them may have had
enlarged and sometimes slightly decorative
letters at the beginning of important
paragraphs, but that would probably be all.
The early Irish manuscripts were written
on vellum, specially prepared from calfskin,
and not on parchment as is popularly
believed. The Irish script is, naturally, not
indigenous, but is based on a combination
of various elements from several ancient
scripts. It is found in two main varieties, a
majuscule and a minuscule script (i.e. upper
case and lower case respectively). An
artistic script, it has lasted with little change
right down to the present day.
The earliest known Irish manuscript
showing any sign of illumination is undoubtedly
the Cathach (See page 127). This
book, containing sixty-four psalms in
Latin, is now preserved in the Royal Irish
Academy. Tradition links it with Saint
Columcille, holding that it is the very book
which he copied illegally and which
resulted in the Battle of Cul Dreimhne and
his subsequent exile to Iona in A.D. 563. The
story is well-known. Saint Columcille, on
a visit to his friend Saint Finnian of Moville,
surreptitiously copied a precious book
belonging to that saint who on discovering
the breach of what we should now call
copyright-and, indeed, of trust and friendship-
demanded the copy. Columcille
refused to hand it over and the matter was
brought before Diarmuid, the High King
of Ireland, who is reported to have made
the famous, if facile, judgement, "to every
cow its calf". Columcille rebelled against
the judgement, and mustering his people,
the Cineal Conaill, and others to his aid, he
defeated the High King in a bloody battle
at Cul Dreimhne. Repentance, and judgement
by his peers, followed, and Columcille
chose to leave the land of his birth to expiate
the crime of causing so many deaths by
working among, and converting, the
heathen Scots. The Cathach as we know it
today, may well be the book in question as
palaeographically there is nothing against
such an early date for it. Furthermore, as
Doctor Françoise Henry has pointed out,
the text is a fairly good recension of the
translation of the psalter made by Saint
Jerome, a version which would at the time
have been a novelty to Ireland and which
would, therefore, account for Columcille's
anxiety to copy it-the saint's acquaintance
with the pre-Jerome version and the
necessity for haste in copying the new
version would, perhaps, account for any
impurities to be found in the text of the
Cathach. Furthermore, we are told that
Saint Finnian is supposed to have gone to
Rome and to have returned with "the
complete Gospels", which would support
the theory that the tradition associated with
the Cathach may be based on fact.
If, in fact, the Cathach is the book so
hastily copied by Saint Columcille, then
the saint was really the first-class scribe
which he is thought to have been. The
script, Irish majuscule, is beautiful and the
decorated initial letters at the beginning of
each psalm are often superlative in design
though simple and sparsely coloured. The
Page from Codex Usserianus
Primus, which has a pre-Vulgate
text and is of uncertain
origin, but may be of seventh
century.
Traditional Symbol of Saint John, an eagle - Book
of Armagh.
colours employed, apart from the dark
brown of the letters themselves, are red and
yellow. The relatively large and decorative
initial letters are sometimes surrounded by
vermillion dots, and are followed by letters
diminishing in size until the normal letter-size
is reached, the former feature being
perhaps, though not necessarily, of Coptic
origin and the latter an original Irish
contribution to manuscript illumination,
both features are characteristic of later Irish
illumination. Spirals, scrolls, and swelling
lines bisected by a pointed oval (the so-called
"trumpet" motif), all basically Celtic motifs,
are found in the Cathach, while small
equal-armed crosses, mounted on handle-like
appendages, and animal heads make up
the rest of its decoration.
The real importance of the Cathach is that
it is an undoubtedly Irish manuscript,
showing that manuscript illumination was
being practised in Ireland before contacts
with Continental Europe became really
close and well before the development of
any Northumbrian scriptorium.
Saint Columcille travelled to Iona in 563,
inaugurating the great Irish missionary
work in Scotland and northern England.
Less than thirty years afterwards Saint
Columbanus departed from Bangor, Co.
Down, to begin missionary work on the
Continent, travelling through France,
Germany, Switzerland and northern Italy.
The last and most famous monastery
founded by Saint Columbanus was that at
Bobbio in northern Italy, and it is the
library of this monastery which provides us
with most of the early seventh-century
manuscripts illuminated in the Irish
tradition.
An exception may be the fragmentary
manuscript now in the Library of Trinity
College, Dublin, which is known as the
Codex Usserianus Primus. This manuscript
has an early pre-Vulgate text and is written
in a script which closely resembles the
similarly dated (early seventh century)
Bobbio manuscripts. However, its history
is unknown and whether it originated in
the Bobbio scriptorium or in a contemporary
Irish one is uncertain. The most notable
decorative feature is a large square panel
containing a large red cross of Chi-Rho
type which is outlined and ornamented
with black dots and flanked by the Alpha
and Omega. A good parallel for this cross
with the Alpha and Omega is to be found
on a slab at Loher, Co. Kerry, but parallels
can also be found in some early north
Italian manuscripts. This large panel containing
the cross is important in the story
of Irish illumination in that it provides
evidence of a branch of the art other than
initial letters, perhaps even the beginning of
the so-called "carpet pages" of pure ornament
which are to be found in later
illuminated manuscripts.
Some of the early Bobbio manuscripts,
now preserved in the Ambrosian Library,
Milan, are dateable to the period immediately
following the death of Saint Columbanus
in 615, one in particular, Ms. S. 45,
sup., seemingly having belonged to Atalanus,
the immediate successor of Columbanus as
abbot of the monastery. Some of this
manuscript is written and decorated in the
Irish manner, as also is the contemporaneous
Ms.D. 23. sup., likewise in the Ambrosian
Library. The latter manuscript has the
large initial letters surrounded by dots, and
the interesting feature of groups of three
dots also occurs, a feature which is found in
later Irish manuscripts. It also has an
introductory page which is given over
entirely to rather elementary ornament - a
simple type of "carpet-page".
The Bobbio manuscripts possess some
apparently oriental features, for example the
use of dots which, as already mentioned,
may be of Coptic origin, and it would
appear probable that Bobbio may well have
acted as a sort of meeting place between the
eastern and the western worlds of Christendom.
Ireland, however, appears perhaps to
have had some direct contact with the Near
East, the records speaking of Egyptians,
Armenians and "Romani" (to be identified
as Byzantines) visiting Irish monasteries,
while sixth- century Mediterranean pottery
found in southern Ireland may indicate
direct contacts with that area. Whether the
contacts were direct or indirect is not of
great importance, the fact of the matter
being that oriental influence seems to be
discernable in many of the characteristic
features of subsequent Irish illumination.
While monasteries with scriptoria were
being established on the Continent by
Saint Columbanus and his colleagues, we
must not forget that in Scotland and in
northern England the Columban Mission,
working from Iona, was busy establishing
many fine monasteries, and that in the best
Columban tradition one of their more
important features was the scriptorium.
Undoubtedly the most important and best-known
foundation which was set up from
Iona was on the small island of Lindisfarne,
in Northumbria, off the north-east coast of
England. The monastery, founded in 635
by a monk from Iona, Saint Aidan, had, of
course, a scriptorium, one which later was to
produce one of the three really great
illuminated manuscripts of the so-called
"Celtic" art-style. Such a work as the Book
of Lindisfarne could not have been produced
without a long tradition behind it, and it
seems clear that the scriptoria in Northumbria
and Scotland must have been
working on illumination almost from the
moment of their foundation, no doubt in
continual fraternal contact with Iona and
related Irish monasteries, particularly with
those working under the Columban rule
such as Derry, Durrow, Swords, Drumcliff
Such undoubted contact across the Irish Sea
would readily account for the presence of
many Anglo-Saxon elements in the Irish
art of the period, elements which can not
all be explained away by suggesting that the
objects so ornamented were actually
imported from Northumbria and elsewhere
in England.
Approaching the middle of the sixth
century A.D., we have, therefore, all the
makings of a revitalised art- style in Ireland.
There is an active school of artists, not only
producing fine metal-work but also actively
engaged in producing illuminated manuscripts;
there is a strong, if rather tired,
Celtic artistic basis waiting expectantly to
be revived and re-inspired; there are new
artistic and technological ideas arriving
from the Near East and from Continental
Europe, and, perhaps most important, very
close contacts with related schools of art in
Scotland and northern England resulting
in a continual stimulating interchange of
ideas. The material was present, the stimulation
was there, and all that was needed
was a little extra patience, a lot of courage
and a few strokes of genius, to combine
them and produce a type of art which
would spark off one of the greatest phases
in the history of art which the world has
ever known.
Where exactly the great burst forward
was made is a much-argued point, many
opting for Northumbria, others for Ireland,
and yet others attempting to find a way out
by suggesting that it might have been in
Scotland, or more particularly, in Iona.
The evidence is stronger for Northumbria
and Ireland than for Scotland, but one thing
seems fairly clear; the first break seems to
have been made by a Columban monastery.
Indeed, each of the most famous illuminated
books in the so-called "Celtic" art- style is
associated with a famous Columban
foundation, namely, with Durrow,
Lindisfarne and Kells.
The Book of Durrow, now preserved in
the Library of Trinity College, Dublin, is
unquestionably the glory of this seventh-century
amalgamation of art-elements. Its
known association with Durrow, Co.
Offaly, goes back almost a thousand years
and there seems to be no good reason to
believe that it was not associated with that
monastery for considerably longer, though
whether it was illuminated there or in
Northumbria or, perhaps equally probable,
in Derry, is still an open question. It is
generally dated some time between 650 and
680, which one might perhaps suggest,
argues strongly in favour of an Irish rather
than a Northumbrian origin, the Irish
scriptoria having had the benefit of a long
tradition behind them while the British
scriptoria would have still been virtually in
their infancy almost entirely dependent on
Irish teachers equipped with Irish
exemplars. A further argument in favour
of the Book of Durrow's being of Irish
origin is that it appears to be the climax of
an art-style which did not lead on to, nor
was a phase of the subsequent art-styles
of manuscript illumination which seem to
have mainly originated from Lindisfarne
and other Northumbrian monasteries.
The Book of Durrow is an almost complete
book of 248 leaves, containing the text of
the four Gospels plus some introductory
matter. It is written in Irish majuscule and
is highly illuminated. The colours used are
orange-red, yellow, and moss-green, made
from red lead, orpiment, and verdigris
respectively; the script and outlines of the
ornament are in deep-coloured black-brown
ink.
The Book of Durrow opens with three
ornamental pages, the first showing a great
double-armed cross, set against a background
of interlace. Coptic books of a
slightly later date (eighth, ninth and tenth
centuries) open in a somewhat similar
manner, and also use the same colours, red,
yellow and green, as does the Book of
Durrow. Coptic parallels can also be found
for the use of "carpet-pages" as in the Book
of Durrow and other Irish illuminated manuscripts.
These are whole pages covered with
ornament, not an integral part of the text,
nor illustrations relative to it, nor even
symbolic in any way-they are purely
decorative, an extra embellishment, a
gratuitous bonus. Such "carpet-pages" are
only known from illuminated manuscripts
of the Irish (including Northumbrian, of
course) schools and from eighth-century
and later Coptic and Syrian manuscripts.
The use of a bordered, board-ribbon
interlace of relatively simple type, often
with sharp or squared angles, such as is
found in the Book of Durrow, can also be
paralleled in the Near East, but in this case
we need not confine our search for parallels
to the manuscripts, which are all later than
the Irish ones, but can legitimately look to
the earlier textiles and icons for prototypes.
There are also other features found in early
Irish illumination, though not necessarily
in the Book of Durrow, for which an oriental
origin has often been suggested. These
include the manner in which the Eusebian
Canon Tables (a tabulated "index" of the
Gospels, showing which verses of each
Gospel can be correlated with the others)
are set out in arcades, one frame for each
Gospel, the occurrence of the inhabited vine-scroll,
and the processions of birds.
Whether or not Coptic influence can be
invoked for all the above features has still
not been cleared up. The main problem
lies in the absence of illuminated Eastern
manuscripts ante-dating the earlier
examples from the Irish schools, but the
presence of such similarities can hardly be
fortuitous. The possibility of some of these
features originating in Ireland and being
adopted by some Eastern schools has been
hinted at, but such an event seems most
unlikely. Likewise, the possibility that some
of the features may owe their origin to a
third school of art which provided the
prototypes for both the Irish and Eastern
examples, e.g. Roman - Sub-Roman - Coptic,
and Roman - Sub-Roman - Irish.
However, to place too much stress on such
theories would be unwarranted on the
present evidence. Until a better alternative
is suggested and shown to be reasonably
probable, we are forced to accept the quite
plausible hypothesis of Eastern influence on
early Irish Christian art.
The "carpet-pages" of the Book of
Durrow are particularly interesting in the
variety of the ornament they display. That
Page of Spirals-Book of Durrow
generally referred to as the Page of Spirals
is noteworthy for the frame of broad-ribbon interlace and the central area filled
with wonderful, swirling spiral patterns.
The interlace is a new motif which the
Celtic artist had not yet made his own - it
is treated rather pedantically and is
uninspired. As if appreciating this, the
artist has clearly kept it separate from the
marvellously involved and brilliantly
inspired spiral decorations which are
obviously a development from the earlier
Celtic curvilinear motifs which he had
inherited from his own background. He
clearly feels quite at home with the
curvilinear Celtic ornament, the master of
all its intricacies, but when faced with producing
decoration in the unfamiliar interlaced
style he equally clearly finds himself
somewhat at a loss and his heart does not
seem to be in it.
A similar ability with, and personal
involvement in, curvilinear Celtic-derived
ornament and a seeming lack of understanding
and real interest in interlace is
apparent in the page giving the beginning
of Saint Mark's Gospel. Here, as elsewhere,
the spirals are ornate and full of life, while
the interlaced plaitwork is pedestrian,
almost banal. The Celtic characteristic of
transforming geometric patterns into
zoomorphs (animal designs) appears once
again, the whirling, linked spirals at the
bottom of the conjoined IN (at the
beginning of INITIUM) having a fleeting
resemblance to an animal's head, the uppermost
spirals representing the ears, the large
enclosed ones representing the eyes, below
these the large pair of spirals resembling
outwardly flaring nostrils, and the small
spirals extending from the bottom perhaps
intended as the animal's curling tongue.
Such a resemblance might appear over-imaginative
to some, but for anyone who
knows the earlier Celtic work, including
the zoomorphic terminals of the slightly
earlier penannular ring-brooches, the
acceptance of a zoomorph at the bottom
of the initials will be easy; for those still
inclined to doubt, the animal-head in the
corner of the frame around the beginning of
Saint Matthew's Gospel in the Book of
Mac Regol, though about a century and a
quarter later in date, should provide the
necessary key.
Quite apart from the extensive use of
ribbon interlace, there are other elements
to be found in the Book of Durrow which are
new to the repertoire of the Irish artist. One
of these is an attempt at representational art
resulting in the pseudo-representational
Evangelical symbols. The Lion-Saint
Mark, the calf-Saint Luke, the eagle - Saint
John, and the man-Saint Matthew,
are all recognisable as such, but only just.
Each of these symbols is represented on a
plain background, within a rectangular
frame filled with broad-ribbon interlace.
These symbols are not in themselves works
of art and, indeed, they seem to make no
pretence at being anything other than
obligatory symbols. The artist, with his
Celtic background which abhorred all
representational art in the Classical style,
does not seem to have been able to bring
himself to produce naturalistic animals and
seems to have almost deliberately represented
them as designs of the sort which
might almost be termed heraldic. The
Matthew symbol illustrates the problem
excellently: the head and feet are shown
reasonably naturalistically, but the rest of
the body is depicted as a featureless trapezoidal
shape, narrower and rounded at the
top, the whole covered with small squares,
not all of the same colour and design, and
with a narrow strip of simple interlace
reaching from the top almost to the bottom.
There is no trace of arms or other anatomical
details. It seems possible to interpret it
as a rather clever way of avoiding the onus
of having to depict the human body by
showing it as if covered by a calf-length,
sleeveless, multi-coloured cloak; one might
even suggest that it represents a sort of
chausable, taking the line of interlace as
Beginning of Saint Mark's Gospel, Book of Durrow.
representing a laced-up opening which
does not extend to the bottom, which in
turn indicates that the vestment would be
worn by passing it over the wearer's head
and not by wrapping it around the
shoulders. A further observation might be
made concerning this figure, namely that
it gives the appearance of being based on a
metal prototype. The head is drawn as if
the face protrudes from the page in relief
with the hair incised on a flat background,
and the cloaked body is drawn as if it was
a framed, flat field of ornament (the
chequered pattern has often been compared
with millefiori-small squares of multicoloured
glass which are often found set
closely together), and the feet are drawn in
profile as if incised on a flat surface. The
well-known bronze mounting from Saint
John's Point, Rinnagan, near Athlone, with
its low relief face, flat robe (with a line of
interlace down: its centre), and feet incised
on a flat surface, provides us with a useful
comparison and may, indeed, be almost
contemporary with the Book of Durrow.
The art of the metal-worker is elsewhere
evident in the Book of Durrow, notably on
one of the "carpet-pages" which is ornamented
with a field of broad-ribbon interlace
into which are fitted rectangular panels
of various geometric linear designs,
including designs very similar to the metal
grilles which were used to cap glass studs
or to the metal cloisons which were used
to contain enamel.
While the introduction to the Irish repertoire
of simple ribbon-interlace and of
figurative art can be traced back to the
Mediterranean world, we must look to
Anglo-Saxon England for the introduction
of zoomorphic or animal interlace. This
type of ornament, later to be completely
absorbed and transformed by the Celtic
schools of art, occurs on one “carpet-page”
in the Book of Durrow. There are three
types of zoomorph displayed on this page,
none closely identifiable with any particular
beast. One is somewhat horse-like, one is
slightly reptilian, while the third might
perhaps be called dog-like, and yet all three
are apparently of the same family. All
these animals have demonstrably Germanic
ancestry and very close parallels for them
can be easily found in the metal-work of
seventh-century England. Some of the
animals in the Book of Durrow hardly differ
from their Anglo-Saxon prototypes and it
almost seems as if the artist is copying them
rather than following the Celtic tradition
of transforming his models to suit his own
inclinations. Whether this was due to a lack
of familiarity with zoomorphic interlace
or a lack of sympathy with it is not clear,
but this unusual situation, although not
unique in the history of early Irish illumination,
was short-lived.
In fact, the whole art of the Book of
D11rrow was short-lived, for the art of the
subsequent illuminated manuscripts is quite
different. The Book of Durrow, as we have
already mentioned, was not so much a
forerunner of the Book of Lindisfarne, the
Book of Kells and others as a representative
of a style which seems to have developed
from various sources, to have flourished
briefly, and then to have been discarded,
only some of its elements continuing and
being further developed in the later art-styles.
The art-style associated with Insular (i.e.
Irish and Northumbrian) illuminated manuscripts
seems to have been developed in the
monasteries of Lindisfarne, Jarrow,
Wearmouth, and elsewhere within the
Northumbrian sphere of influence. This
development seems to have taken place
shortly before the end of the seventh
century and, of course, to have been
fundamentally based on the Irish-trained
schools of art. The actual art-style differs,
but the spirit behind it remains the same - Celtic.
Curvilinear designs remain but are
not so prominent as before; interlaced
designs occur but are no longer made up of
simple, broad-ribbon knotwork but of
much finer and more tightly woven
Symbol of Saint Matthew - Book of Durrow.
Virgin and Child - Book of Kells.
patterns; zoomorphic interlace is complex,
contorted and intricate, altogether different
from that seen in the Book of Durrow;
ornithomorphic (i.e. with birds) interlace
is introduced and becomes a prominent
feature; vegetal motifs are also introduced;
the various motifs are no longer kept carefully
separated from one another but are
fairly freely mixed; there is a noticeable
improvement in figurative art though
realism is still avoided; initials become ever
larger and more ornate, tending to take
over the whole page; the solid, heavy
frames of the Book of Durrow are generally
replaced by broken or interrupted frames;
"carpet-pages" and other characteristic
features of Irish illuminated manuscripts
remain, of course, though new colours are
used and a much greater impression of
control and technical mastery over the art
is noticeable.
There are many finely decorated manuscripts
belonging to the earlier stages of this
phase of illumination, but easily the finest
and best-known is the Book of Lindisfarne.
This large book of 258 folios, now preserved
in the British Museum, was not written
and illuminated by an Irishman but by a
Saxon, namely Eadfrith, abbot-bishop of
Lindisfarne from A.D. 698 to 721. It seems
very probable that Eadfrith is identifiable
with a monk called Ehfrid whom we know
spent six years studying in Ireland some
time shortly before 690. But whether he is
or is not so identifiable is not of vital
importance, as the known conditions of the
time would lead us to believe that Eadfrith
probably spent some time in Ireland
anyway. Furthermore, the Irish tradition
was so strong in Lindisfarne, and in
Northumbria in general (from 684 to 704,
for instance, the ruler of Northumbria was
the half-Irish King Aldfrid, a former pupil
of Saint Adamnan's), that it would naturally
have permeated his training and education
and, of course, have been expressed in his
work. It is, therefore, not difficult to
w1derstand why the Book of Lindisfarne,
can be rightly termed one of the great
books illuminated in the Irish manner.
The Book of Lindisfarne has been described
as "the only fixed point in the art-history
of this period" because we can date the
abbacy-episcopacy of its author. However,
even such information has not presented us
with a generally acceptable date. One
school of thought argues that Eadfrith must
have written and illuminated the manuscript
shortly before his elevation to the
post of abbot-bishop in 698, perhaps
writing it in connection with the preparations
for the canonization of Saint Cuthbert
(20 March, 698), the local saint of greatest
importance, as afterwards his duties as
abbot-bishop would have been too onorous
to give him the necessary time to work at
such a book. Another school of thought
presents good arguments in favour of
Eadfrith's writing and illuminating the
book shortly before his death in 721, these
arguments including the not quite finished
state of the book. The matter is of some
importance as the later dating would allow
more time for the evolution of the art-style
of the Book of Lindisfarne, and would thus
help explain the very appreciable differences
between the art of the Book of Durrow and
of it-differences more easily explicable after
the space of two generations than of one.
The forty-five distinct shades of colour
found in the Book of Lindisfarne are of red
(red lead), yellow (yellow arsenic sulphide,
orpiment), blue (ultramarine), green (verdigris),
purple (folium), brown (ochre), white
(white lead), pink (purple compounded
with white lead and chalk), and, twice,
gold (gold leaf). The compact, beautifully
balanced designs were planned geometrically,
though oddly enough the recent
detailed examination of the manuscript
revealed that it was the curvilinear rather
than the interlaced ornament which was
the more mechanically drawn. Perhaps
because of the extensive use of mechanical
aids and because of its regularity, the art of
the Book of Lindisfarne often presents a
rather monotonous, stilted, and lifeless
appearance. One sometimes gets the
impression that Eadfrith was an extremely
competent craftsman, complete master of
all the technical tricks of the trade, but not
an inspired artist who would ever risk
departing from recognised conventions.
Each of the four Gospels is preceded by a
page with a portrait of the Evangelist and
his symbol, then a "carpet-page", then the
opening letters of the Gospel. Despite the
seeming lifelessness of some of the designs
when looked upon as a whole, their details
are often teeming with life. The intricate,
small-scale, compact, matted tissue of
ornament such as fills the cross and the
background of one of the best-known of
its ornamental pages provides a good
example of this. The general feeling is of
a tangled clutter of dead worms, too
regularly laid out in neatly symmetrical
order to ever suggest that one of them
might wriggle, yet if one examines closely
any small part of the design a whole series
of interlocked birds and beasts can be seen - it
is the repetitiveness of the same group of
interlocked birds and beasts which kills the
whole. A somewhat similarly planned and
worked out page in the Lichfield Gospels,
roughly contemporary with the Book of
Lindisfarne, appears to be a writhing,
teeming mass of life (the background above
the arms of the cross perhaps excepted),
well illustrating the difference between the
spark of genius of an artist and the dogged
perfectionism of a craftsman.
Most of the illuminated manuscripts of
this period, the first quarter of the eighth
century, probably derive from "Irish"
scriptoria in Northumbria, though that is
not to say that the scriptoria in Ireland were
idle. There can be little doubt but that
there was a continual interchange of ideas
and techniques between scriptoria in the
two areas, and many eighth-century Irish
illuminated manuscripts are known. These
include large altar-books such as the Saint
Gall Gospels-probably the book which
approaches closest to the Books of Durrow,
Lindisfarne, and Kells, in fame and grandeur
-and also several smaller "pocket-books"
such as the Book of Dimma and the Book of
Mulling. The art of these Irish manuscripts
differs appreciably from those made in
Northumbrian monasteries in that it is
generally bolder, more daring, less
involved, less sophisticated, perhaps, and
more spontaneous in style and feeling. The
Irish artist is courageous, works on a fairly
large scale and is not afraid to slap bright
colours bravely over large areas, nor afraid
to take a chance on drawing a straight line
or a spiral free-hand. He also has a sense of
humour and an apparent disregard for what
others might think. One gets the impression
that he is the master and that he had every
intention of producing the book the way
he felt like, rather than the way his abbot
thought best. He gives the impression of
being an irrepressible Celt enjoying himself,
in contrast to his colleagues in England
who often seem to be well-disciplined
strangers working in a Celtic idiom.
The manuscript which, perhaps, best
illustrates the seeming disregard for law
and order inherited by the Celtic artist is
the Book of Mac Regol, now in the Bodleian
Library, Oxford. This manuscript is the
work of Mac Riaghoil ua Magleni, abbot
of the monastery of Birr, Co. Offaly, who
died in 822. The illuminated pages are few,
but once seen are never forgotten. Red
and yellow predominate, purple and green
playing a lesser role. There is a self-confident,
slap-dash effect about the whole
work, which is about as rough-and-ready
and unsophisticated as any "primitive"
artist of the nineteenth or twentieth century
ever managed. Everything seems to be left
to chance, the artist seemingly letting
himself go, not quite knowing what is
going to happen but with the confidence
of someone fully certain that only a masterpiece
could result. Mac Regal was
obviously a strong-willed man of great
character, though not necessarily a person
Chi-Ro page-Book of Kells-detail.
Animal in text-Book of Kells.
Above: Birds in text. Right:
Animal in text-both Book of
Kells.
Interlace decoration in human motif in text – Book
of Kells.
of much charm; perhaps a simple soul, who
by dint of hard work and personal sanctity
had become an abbot and a bishop, the
type of person who would irritate others
yet would be loved in retrospect. Such is
the picture evoked by his bold strokes of
colour, not necessarily filling the areas
intended nor necessarily being confined to
those places, his wild, free-hand spirals, his
utter lack of restraint, the inconsequential
way in which his lovely lettering is thrown
together on the illuminated pages, and the
garish effect of the finished result. There is
little doubt but that Mac Regol was a born
not a highly skilled artist, but an
individualist, perhaps self-taught, and,
furthermore, a real Celt, every inch an
Irishrn.an-the prototype, perhaps, of the
old-fashioned, stern but well loved, Irish
country priest.
The Celtic genius displayed by Mac
Regol did not result in the masterpiece the
artist may have felt he had produced,
mainly because of the well-nigh complete
lack of discipline and control his work
displays. When the Celtic genius was
combined with firm but not inhibiting
discipline and control, it could be superior
to anything, and it was just such a combination
which produced the real masterpiece
of all illumination, the Book of Kells.
It is not certain whether or not there was
a monastery at Kells before the Columban
monks fleeing from Iona, as a consequence
of Viking raids, arrived there at the
beginning of the ninth century. If there was,
then it can hardly be described as thriving
nor, indeed, as in any way active. It seems
unlikely, therefore, that work on the Book
of Kells was actually instigated at Kells,
though there seems to be some grounds for
believing that it was finished there, having
been begun in Iona. It has been, however,
historically associated with Kells from a
very early date, until Cromwellian times
when it was sent to Dublin for safety and
shortly afterwards was presented to the
Library of Trinity College, Dublin, where
it still is housed. A large book, containing
the Gospels and some introductory matter,
it has at present 340 folios-originally it
had about 3 50 folios but now a few folios
at both ends are missing. It is more luxuriantly
decorated than any other Irish
illuminated manuscript, the colours
including various shades of red, blue,
yellow, bright green, olive-green, purples,
brown and white. It is in a "mixed text", of
the Old Latin and Vulgate versions, typical
of most Irish manuscripts, and was carelessly
copied, including, as it does, many
misspellings and other errors. However, it
is unlikely that the Book of Kells ever was
intended for reading and so such errors
would never have been considered as very
serious blemishes-the Book of Kells is, as
one commentator has so aptly remarked,
primarily a visual experience.
Almost every feature and characteristic
that we have seen before in the earlier
illuminated Irish manuscripts is to be found
in the Book of Kells. We find the Celtic
curvilinear art, the oriental ribbon-interlace,
the Anglo-Saxon zoomorphic interlace, the
geometric key- and fret-patterns, the inhabited
vine, the ornithomorphic interlace,
the pseudo-realistic portraits, the large
initial letters with the following letters
decreasing in size, and also numerous other
new features such as the frequent use of
little humans, animals, birds and fishes
introduced into the decoration and into
the text itself. And most important of all,
the whole treatment of the decoration is
executed in the same Celtic tradition, with
its love of pure ornamentation and
instinctive abhorrence of naturalistic effects,
as that which was common to the Celts of
pre-Roman times.
It can hardly be doubted that work on
the Book of Kells continued over a period of
several years, and there is equally little
doubt about its not all being the work of
one person. The hands of several artists
have been identified by Doctor Françoise
Henry, probably the most able expert in
Chi-Ro page in the Book of Kells.
the field of early Irish illumination. By a
detailed study of their various styles, she
has segregated the work of artists whom.
she calls the "goldsmith", the "portraitist",
the "illustrator", and the "animal painter",
while the work of a miscellaneous group of
less expert artists is assigned to the "pupils".
Despite their several individual styles, all
were probably from the same Iona-Kells
scriptorium and were, in consequence,
working together, presumably in complete
accord. This gives the whole book a feeling
of unity, a unity which is at least partly due
to the Celtic treatment of the entire scheme
of decoration as well as of the individual
motifs. There is little of the Classical artistic
approach to be seen in the work: for
instance, the almost entirely decorative
nature of the "goldsmith's" famous Chi-Rho
(Monogram of Christ) page well
illustrates the Celtic love of pure ornamentation,
while the flat, unemotional, unrealistic
aspect of the figures of the angels
and of the Virgin and Child painted by the
"illustrator" clearly demonstrates the Celtic
instinctive abhorrence of naturalistic effects.
The Chi-Rho page is generally regarded
as the finest page in the Book of Kells, being
without equal for its masterly planning,
minute detail, controlled colouring and
sheer virtuosity. Its mood has been described
as a "sort of decorative intoxication",
while another has described the page as
"a strange asymmetrical construction
weighed down by a multiplicity of minute
decoration, which by some miracle of the
art he [the "goldsmith"] has brought to a
state of equilibrium .... At once unique in
execution and at the same time the culmination
of a long historical development, it
remains the supreme achievement in the
field of illumination." But no words can
describe this wonderful page. At first
glance, its motifs all appear to be curvilinear,
ultimately based on Celtic spirals, coils and
whirling, swelling lines. A second glance
reveals that much of the ornament consists
of plain, zoomorphic, and ornithomorphic
interlacing, and that hard, straight lines and
geometrical, rectalinear patterns are also
present. And a third glance disentangles
several angels, human faces, and even little
scenes of animals playing, also two moths
pulling in opposite directions at a lozenge,
and an otter catching a fish. Although these
little animal scenes are perhaps the work of
the "animal painter", it would obviously
have been the idea of the designer of the
page, the "goldsmith", to introduce them
into the ornament. It takes the fourth glance
to appreciate the fact that, by a veritable
succession of strokes of genius, the artist has
been triumphantly successful in so integrating
all the various motifs that the page
has a unity of style-the impression gained
at the first glance was inaccurate but
justified. This page is truly the finest
demonstration of the Celtic spirit at work;
nobody but a Celt could have produced it;
it is an ornamental page-the nearest thing
to a "carpet-page" in the Book of Kells -of
which all Celts of the past, present and
future should be proud.
The illustration of the seated Virgin
holding the Christ-Child on her crossed
knees and surrounded by four angels
presents quite the other aspect of Irish art
of the period. The models for this illustration
were obviously Eastern, perhaps
Coptic, but were equally obviously copied
by a Celt who had not much sympathy
with realism but possessed definite ideas
regarding design and colour. He shows his
lack of interest in realistic illustration in
several little ways, not least in the fact that
the Child has two left feet and perhaps also
two left hands, that the Virgin has two
right feet, that the left hand of the angel in
the upper right corner has five fingers,
and that the angel in the bottom left
corner has two left hands. His daring use of
strong colours, particularly a deep purple
with an apple-green, and sometimes
combined with a bright cherry-red, shows
the natural, unsophisticated eye which the
"illustrator" had for decoration. He applied
Crucifixion page-Southampton Psalter.
his colours fearlessly and solidly, but somehow
with a flair for balance and design
which succeeds in elevating this curious
colour scheme from the primitive to the
artistic. His love and appreciation of strong
colours, nicely yet not geometrically
balanced, is surely a Celtic characteristic
inherited from his prehistoric ancestors.
The Virgin and Child is not, perhaps, the
best of the "illustrator's" work. The Arrest
of Christ is probably his finest page. This
is a strong, wild yet controlled, overpowering
picture, though it, too, shows a
contempt for naturalistic realism-Christ
is being held by what, if the scale were
w1iform, could only be interpreted as two
dwarfs, one of whom has two left hands
and both of whom appears to have two
left feet.
The work of the "illustrator" differs
from that of the "portraitist", whose work
is impressive and imposing, and possesses a
controlled discipline and symmetrical
balance not so evident elsewhere in the
Book of Kells. His portraits of Saint John,
Saint Matthew, and that which has been
variously interpreted as Saint Mark, Saint
Luke, or Christ, are rightly regarded as the
most impressive effigies ever designed by
an Irish artist. Based on Eastern prototypes,
they nonetheless betray their Celtic treatment.
Who but a Celt would have
interlaced the strands of Christ's hair (for it
is most probably Christ rather than either
Luke or Mark); or would have given Him
an extra toe on His right foot; or would
have humorously depicted a seemingly
toothless angel such as the one in the
bottom right corner of the page; or have
given that angel only four toes on his right
foot while giving the upper left angel six
toes on his left foot; or would have drawn
a figure which is apparently standing but
obviously intended to be seated (note the
arms of the chair and the way Christ's
right knee is shown as projecting forwards);
and who but a Celt could have so curiously
and imaginatively depicted Christ's left
hand (holding the book) by not illustrating
it at all?
The "animal painter" had a delicate
sense of humour which he combined with
keen observation to produce numerous
charming vignettes which he scattered
throughout the Book of Kells. His little
sketches are sometimes fairly realistic,
though not in the Classical manner, as, for
instance, when he sketched the otter
catching the fish on the Chi-Rho page, or
little men, squatting or seated, as they drink
out of chalice-like goblets. But much more
often the "animal painter's" efforts are by
no means realistic, and are truly Celtic in
their quite unnatural construction, in their attributes
such as trefoil or lo bate endings to tails
and in the ever-present humorous touches.
There are several other illuminated
manuscripts of roughly the same early
ninth-century period as the Book of Kells,
but none even approaching it in majesty,
artistry, sheer luxury, and wealth of decoration.
Chief among these roughly
contemporary books is probably the Book
of Armagh, now also in the Library of
Trinity College. This is a composite manuscript,
written by Ferdomnach, a most
accomplished scribe who died in A.D. 846
but who had written part, if not all, of the
Book of Armagh in 807-8, as can be deduced
from one of the colophons. Whether
Ferdomnach was also responsible for all the
art in the Book of Armagh is not certain, but
he probably was the artist who penned the
enlarged initials and, if so, may well have
also penned the Evangelical symbols which
some suspect may have been done by
another hand. These are pen-and-ink
drawings and betray a style of art which is
much more sophisticated than is normal in
Irish illumination. Although this impression
of sophistication is, perhaps, mainly due to
the absence of colours, it is not the sole
reason. The symbols are elegantly drawn
in a way which seems to be a trifle mannerist
and precious, and not in the Celtic spirit of
controlled abandon. They are awkward
and uninspired, perhaps merely fairly
competent copies of non-Irish originals,
such as a competent craftsman, rather than
an artist, could have produced-this, and
their lack of colour, proclaim them to be
the products of a scribe rather than of an
illuminator.
The art of the Book of Armagh does not
seem to have played an important role in
the history of Irish illumination. One
reason for this may be that it seems to be
the art of a scribe rather than that of an
artist, but another reason may be that
because of the Viking raids of the ninth,
tenth and eleventh centuries, the monastic
scriptoria were unable to continue to develop
their art in peace. Despite these raids,
however, there remain a few illuminated
manuscripts dating from Viking times. The
best of these include the Book of Mac Durnan,
now in the Lambeth Palace Library,
London, the psalter, Ms. Cotton Vitellius
F.XI, now in the British Museum, and the
Southampton Psalter, now in the Library of
St. John's College, Cambridge.
The Book of Mac Durnan dates probably
from the second half of the ninth century,
and can perhaps be described as a rather
degenerate successor to the early ninth-century
Irish illuminated manuscripts. The
Psalter in the Cotton Collection can be
dated to the beginning of the tenth century,
and breaks with earlier tradition in containing
framed large-scale iconographic
scenes, somewhat reminiscent of those on
the Scripture Crosses of roughly the same
date. The artist seems to be completely at
sea with such scenes, and the figures are
amateurishly drawn, giving the impression
of being disjointed, almost as if made up
from a collage of flat pieces of wood. The
non-figurative art is much better, but is not
particularly inspired, be it interlacing or
key-pattern. The Southampton Psalter is
datable to the early eleventh century, and
its illumination is much in the same style
as that of the Cotton Psalter. It also contains
framed iconographic scenes with the figures
on a plain background, but the figures do
not fill the framed area as fully as those of
the earlier manuscript. Colours are few,
mainly red and yellow, and the art is
degenerate and lacking in originality, while
the figures are almost comical in their
flatness, simplicity, and puppet-like appearance.
As can be seen, the period of the Viking
raids witnessed an appreciable decline in the
art of the country, not least in that of the
illuminated manuscripts. In a way, it was a
period of transition between the great art
of the seventh, eighth and early ninth
centuries, culminating in the Book of Kells,
and the Romanesque art of the post-Viking
centuries. A decline was about due, as it
would have been well-nigh impossible to
keep up the standard of the art of the
Book of Kells, much less improve on it, and
so we need not cast too much blame on the
Vikings. It was time for a change, and the
curious iconographical pictures of the tenth
and early eleventh-century manuscripts such
as in the Cotton and the "Southampton"
Psalters, perhaps were a deliberate effort to
move forward from the earlier art which
had been exploited as fully as seemed
possible. Such also might be said for the
figurative sculpture of the High Crosses
which are not in the earlier tradition but
signal the approach of the later Romanesque
art in many ways. The purely
decorative motifs such as the curvilinear
and interlaced ornament did not disappear
altogether, however, and, though uninspired
and apparently degenerate, they are
found decorating the initial letters or filling
the frames around the pictorial scenes in the
manuscripts of the period. On the High
Crosses such ornament is also found, and
though often very fine technically and very
pleasing to the eye, it tends to be more
mechanical and symmetrical than that
which went before. Curvilinear art was all
but bankrupt of ideas, while interlaced art
was almost played out ... it was truly time
for a change.
