Glenosheen is a picturesque little
village in the Ballahoura country
in south-east Limerick. Its fame,
however, does not rest solely on its beauty,
for Glenosheen was the native place of
two men who won distinction in their
day and who are still well remembered.
These were the brothers Patrick Weston
Joyce and Robert Dwyer Joyce.
Patrick Weston (P. W.) Joyce was a
man of many parts, teacher, educationalist,
translator, historian, topographer, collector
of folk music; while Robert Dwyer Joyce,
who qualified as a doctor, is best remembered
as a song writer, a song writer in
whose verses we find frequent mention of
the lovely Glenosheen countryside-
Afar in the vales of green 'Houra my heart
lingers all the day long,
Mid the dance of light-footed maidens,
with the music of Ounanaar's song;
Where the steep hills uprise all empurpled
with the bloom of the bright heather bells,
Looking down on their murmuring daughters,
the blue streams of Houra's wild dells.
Sunday, 16 June, 1968, saw a simple but
very impressive tribute paid to the Joyce
brothers in their native village. Members
of the Cork city branch of Comhaltas
Ceoltóirí Eireann, who had originated the
praiseworthy idea of visiting places associated
with collectors of Irish music,
decided to visit Glenosheen on that day.
They were joined by members of the
Kilmallock Comhaltas branch, for what was
intended to be an informal session of
traditional music that would be held in
the open and that might, its promoters
hoped, attract an audience of forty or
fifty people. Instead of that, a crowd of
hundreds of people came along, all anxious
to join in this tribute to the Joyce brothers.
It was a beautiful sunny day, the kind
of day that organisers of outdoor functions
are blessed with only once or twice in a
lifetime. And the beauty of the day was
only in keeping with the beauty of the
setting. The little village of Glenosheen,
comprising no more than a handful of
houses, stretches along a very short byroad
that climbs from the Ardpatrick-Kildorrery
road to the Green Wood - Glenanaar-
Mallow road. There were
crowds all along that short, linking by-road,
and sitting on the high stone walls and
on the roadside fences; and from the
crossroads on the Ardpatrick-Kildorrery
road one looked up the sloping village
street to the great wooded bulk of Seefin
(Suí Finn), the highest point of the Ballahouras,
which rises l,702 feet straight over
the village, and which to- day provided a
majestic back-cloth to the proceedings.
And all around were other hills and glens
and woods and streams, with brown
Castleoliver conspicuous on its height in
ancient Clonodfoy. The eyes never ceased
to roam up the hillsides and down the
glens; but the ears remained willing
prisoners of the haunting music of violin,
pipe and flute that was the musicians'
special tribute to the Joyce who was a
collector of music and the Joyce who was
a singer of songs.
Michael Joyce, a brother of P.W. and
Robert Dwyer Joyce, compiled a very
interesting pedigree of the family in 1898.
The family, according to this pedigree,
was descended from Sean Mór Seoighe
(Joyce), who came from the Joyce Country
in Galway to Lixnaw in Kerry about the
year 1680. It appears that this Sean Mór
was employed as a steward by the Earl of
Lixnaw, who gave him a large tract of
land for his own use in the Lixnaw district,
and also a further considerable amount of
land in the Athlacca district in County
Limerick.
The arrival of a Galway Joyce in Lixnaw
may be accounted for by the fact that there
was a surprisingly large amount of friendly
communication between the Lixnaw district
and West Connacht in the seventeenth
and preceding centuries, as Stiofan
O hAnrachain notes in his book, Caint an
Bhaile Dhuibh (p. 5). O'Malleys, for
example, were frequent visitors to the
Earls of Lixnaw (Fitzmaurices). These
numerous Connacht visitors came by sea,
and probably transferred to smaller boats
which were able to sail up the four miles
of the Cashen river which brought them
within a mile or two of Lixnaw.
Sean Mór had a son named Risteard
Caol, and he in turn had a son named
Bearnard Rua, who was married to a
Brid Mac Auliffe from Newmarket, Co.
Cork. Sometime about the year 1750,
Bearnard Rua and his wife, and his son
Gearóid Mór, with perhaps other members
of the family, came to live to Athlacca.
Gearóid Mór married Maryanne Hogan
of Athlacca. Their eldest son Robert
became known as Roibeard an Gaeilgeoir,
presumably on account of his more than
usual proficiency in his native language,
Irish.
In 1783 Roibeard an Gaeilgeoir went to
Glenosheen, and settled on a piece of
mountainy land he had acquired by marrying
Anne Howard, daughter of John
Howard, or Sean Rua Ó hiomhair, as
he was known to his contemporaries.
Sean Rua Ó hiomhair had originally
belonged to Kinsale, but after his house
had been accidently burned he came to
Kilfinane on the invitation of his first
cousin, James Bible, and settled there.
Sean Rua had four sons, Garrett, Richard,
James and John, who were all skilled
musicians. Indeed P. W. Joyce himself
attributed his love and ear for music to
the Howard blood that was in him.
Michael Joyce, the compiler of the
Joyce pedigree, remembered Roibeard an
Gaeilgeoir Joyce well, and tells us, "He
was a tall handsome man, blessed with a
fine voice and well versed in Irish history
and legend and all the delightful traditions
of the country." He died in 1828.
Roibeard an Gaeilgeoir had a son, Garrett
Joyce (the father of P. W., Robert Dwyer
and Michael Joyce) and he too, as were
those of his line who preceded him, was
distinguished by an epithet, in this case
"Garrett the Scholar." This was the name
given him by one of the fraternity of the
New Lights whom he had vanquished in
a disputation on religion in the year l829.
Public disputation of this kind was common
at that period. Garrett was a shoemaker
by trade, and in addition to his interest
in religion he was very fond of poetry and
could, it was said, repeat the Iliad and the
Odyssey with but very few mistakes.
The census return for 1821, when Garrett
was living in Ballyorgan, has the following
entry: "Joyce: Garrett Joyce (27) shoe-maker; occasionally employed. Betty Joyce
(27) wife. Michael Joyce (3) son. John
Joyce (1) son."
As a matter of interest it might be
mentioned that the census return gives
"flax spinner" as the occupation of several
people in Ballyorgan at that time.
Although he called him Garrett Barry,
it is almost certain that it was to his own
father, Garrett the Scholar, that P. W.
Joyce was referring in English as we speak
it in Ireland (pp. 314, 315) when, commenting
on the use of the term Roman
in many parts of Ireland to denote a
Roman Catholic, he wrote:-
"Sixty or seventy years ago controversial
discussions-between a Catholic on
the one hand and a Protestant on the
other-were very common. I witnessed
many when I was a boy-to my great
delight. Garrett Barry, a Roman Catholic,
locally noted as a controversialist, was
arguing with Mick Cantillon, surrounded
by a group of delighted listeners. At last
Garrett, as a final clincher, took up the
Bible, opened it at a certain place and
handed it to his opponent with: 'Read
that heading out for us now if you please.'
Mick took it up and read, 'St. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans.' 'Very well,' says
Garrett: 'now can you show me in any
part of the Bible 'St. Paul's Epistle to the
Protestants'? This, of course, was a down
blow; and Garrett was greeted with a
great hurrah by the Catholic part of his
audience. This story is in Knocknagow but
the thing occured in my neighbourhood
and I heard about it long before Knocknagow
was written."
As I have already remarked, the Garrett
Barry of this story was most likely none
other than P. W. Joyce's own father,
Garrett Joyce, Garrett the Scholar. Garrett
the Scholar was a staunch defender of the
elder Faith, and was well equipped for
disputation, having committed to memory
all the arguments put forward in the famous
public controversy that took place in
Dublin in April, 1827, between Father
Thomas Maguire, parish priest of Inismagrath
in the diocese of Kilmore, and the
Reverend Mr. Pope from Co. Cavan.
The fame of this debate, in which the
victory went to Father Maguire, spread
across the length and breadth of Ireland.
The debate was published in booklet
form, and a County Clare poet, Donncha
Woulfe, sang about it:-
Le briathra briomhara beoil
De Phope go brach rinn ceo
(With fluent words of mouth
Confounded Pope forever).
The ecumenical spirit was not yet
abroad in those days, and perhaps it would
be too much to expect that it would in an
Ireland on which the Penal night had so
lately lifted. The New Lights, one of whom
was out-argued by Garrett Joyce, were
particularly active in the Askeaton district
in the diagonally opposite corner of the
county from Glenosheen. In Askeaton and
the surrounding parishes they began a
vigorous proselytising campaign under the
leadership of the Reverend Richard
Murray, a minister from the North of
Ireland. This campaign was looked upon
with disfavour by the local Protestants,
who enjoyed very good relations with
their Catholic neighbours. In a note in
Abhrain an Reachtuire (p. 115) Doctor
Douglas Hyde has this reference to the
New Lights:
"The New Lights seem to have been
some religious sect. Burns alludes to them
in his poem The Twa Herds, or, the Holy
Tulzie. There is a long poem in English,
The New Lights of Askeaton, written by, I
think, a carpenter, after the Irish form of
versification. I found it in Galway. It consisted
of eight verses ... " Doctor Hyde
gives three verses, the first of which goes
as follows:-
Ye muses now come AID me in admonishing
the PAGANS,
The New Lights of ASKEATON, whose
FATE I do deplore;
From innocence and REASON they are
led to CONDEMNATION,
Their faith they have VIOLATED,
the OCCASION of their woe.
The Mass they have FORSAKEN,
their source and RENOVATION,
To free them from DAMNATION and
SATAN'S violent yoke;
The means of their SALVATION at
the great accounting TABLE,
When mountains shall be SHAKEN and
NATIONS overthrown.
(Note: The words in capitals indicate
the assonantal pattern of the poem. A person
familiar with Irish poetry would instinctively
emphasise the vowel sound, corresponding
to Irish "E," in each case, and
would of course pronounce "Askeaton"
as if spelt "Askayton" and "reason" as if
spelt “rayson”.
And all the work of poetic condemnation
was not left to the anonymous versifier
from whom I have quoted, for Father
Liam Mac Gearailt, parish priest of Newcastle
West; Seamas Ó Caoinleabhain,
of Strand, near Newcastle West, Eoghan
Caomhanach of Kilmallock, and Sean
Ó Domhnaill of Athlacca, wrote poems in
Irish against the New Lights. It was the
last muster of the Gaelic poets of Limerick.
Garrett Joyce ("the Scholar"), the recalling
of whose verbal victory over the
spokesman of the New Lights, caused us
to digress somewhat from our subject,
was married to Elizabeth O'Dwyer, who
was born at Keale, in the parish of Glenroe,
in 1795. She bore him eight sons. Of these,
two became famous: Patrick, who was
born in 1827 and Robert who was born
in 1830. Robert later added his mother's
name to his own, and in future was to be
known as Robert Dwyer Joyce. About the
same time Patrick added the name of his
maternal grandmother to his name; hence
the name Patrick Weston Joyce.
That name Weston recalls a romantic
episode. John O'Dwyer, the maternal
grandfather of the Joyces, belonged to a
fairly well-off family. His father was
William O'Dwyer and his mother a Miss
Casey. John was an only son, and was
partly spoilt by his mother, who sent him
to school in Dublin for three years, where
there it is not known for certain, but it
may have been Trinity College. His mother
wished him to be fully accomplished, but
John was more interested in enjoying life
than in overburthening himself with learning.
There was at that time in Kilfinane a
famous dancing academy for young ladies,
and among those attending the academy
was one Mary Rosaleen Weston, daughter
of a fiery old warrior, Major Weston, of
Ballinacurra Weston near Limerick City.
John O'Dwyer saw her, fell in love with
her, and the pair eloped and were married.
O'Dwyer, if captured, would in all probability
have been hanged, for the Major
vowed vengeance on the papist who had
run away with his daughter. But O'Dwyer
had a powerful champion in the person of
his neighbour, Captain Oliver of Clonodfoy
(now Castleoliver), who used his
influence not only to mollify the anger of
the major but to effect a reconciliation
between himself and O'Dwyer as well.
O'Dwyer's wife embraced the religion of
her husband and became a very devout
Catholic. Her husband died at the early
age of thirty-six, leaving two sons, William
and John, and his daughter Elizabeth, to
mourn him. The widow O'Dwyer later
married a man named O'Donnell. She died
in 1838, in her seventieth year, and is
buried in the ancient cemetery on the
summit of Ardpatrick hill.
P. W. Joyce was born in Ballyorgan in
1827. Ballyorgan is a village situated about
a mile east of Glenosheen, and the Joyces
must have been domiciled there for some
years-they were there for the 1821
census-before returning to Glenosheen,
where they were again living by l830,
and where the future historian grew up.
Glenosheen is an interesting little place.
It had a colony of Palatines, descendants
of some of the 3,000 Germans who had
come as refugees from the Rhenish Palatinate
to Ireland in 1709. The largest Palatine
settlement was that on the Southwell
estate near Rathkeale in County Limerick;
and it was from there that a number of
Palatine familes came to Glenosheen, as
well as to nearby Ballyorgan and Garranleash,
on the invitation of the local landlord,
the Right Honourable Silver Oliver. P. W.
Joyce remembered hearing the following
lines being recited by neighbours:
In the year seventeen hundred and nine,
In came the brass-coloured Palatine,
From the ancient banks of the Swabian Rhine.
In Glenosheen the land given to the
Palatines, was unoccupied, so that there
were no evictions or clearances to make
room for them and, consequently, no ill-feelings
among their Irish neighbours. In
his book, The Wonders of Ireland (p. 205)
Joyce says:
"In my early time Glenosheen had a
mixture of Catholics and Protestants
(chiefly Palatine) about half and half and
we got on very well together: in recalling
the kindly memories of my boyhood companions,
Palatines come up as well as
Catholics."
When they first came to Glenosheen,
the Palatines he tells us had to clear large
areas of wood and scrub to prepare their
little farms for cultivation. And at that
time, and for many years subsequently,
their dress, and even their shoes-with the
exception of the soles-were made of
canvas; they ate sauer-kraut, and they slept
between two feather beds, that is, between
a feather tick and a heavy feather quilt,
the latter being of the type that is still
common in many parts of Germany, and
which serves as a combined sheet, blanket
and quilt. Mostly they were Methodists,
but they generally attended the Protestant
church. They were steady, sober and
industrious: good farmers, understood
gardening, kept bees, and were fond of
making pastry. [note: Wonders of Ireland. P. W . Joyce. p. 205.]
The principal Palatine surnames in the
Glenosheen district were Altines or Alton,
Barkman, Bovenizer, Delmege, Fizzell,
Glaizier, Heck, Ligier (Ligonier), Ruttle,
Shoultiss, Strough, Stuffle (Stoffel) Young.[note: Ibid p. 206.]
Of considerable interest is a description
of his native district that Joyce wrote
while still in his early twenties. Apart
from the pleasing picture it unfolds, the
description shows how every feature of
the landscape, as well as the place-names
and the doings of the people had impressed
themselves indelibly upon him.
"The Ballahoura Mountains," he wrote,
"extend for several miles on the borders
of the counties of Cork and Limerick.
Commencing near Charleville (now
officially Rath Luirc), they stretch away
towards the east, consisting of a succession
of single peaks with lone and desolate
valleys lying between, covered with heath
or coarse grass, where for ages the silence
has been broken only by the cry of the
heath-cock or the yelp of the fox echoing
among the rocks that are strewn in wild
confusion over the sides of the mountains.
They increase gradually in height towards
the eastern extremity of the range where
they are abruptly terminated by the majestic
Seefin, which projecting forwards - its
back to the west and its face to the
rising sun - seems placed there to guard the
desolate solitudes behind it.
"Towards the east it overlooks a beautiful
and fertile valley, through which a
little river winds its peaceful course to
join the Funsheon; on the west 'Blackrock
of the Eagle' rears its front-a sheer
precipice - over Lyre-na-Freaghawn, a
black heath-covered glen that divides the
mountains. On the south it is separated by
Lyre-na-Grena, the 'valley of the sun,'
from 'the Long Mountain' which stretches
far away towards Glenanaar; and immediately
in front, on the opposite side of the
valley, rises Barna Geeha, up whose sides
cultivation has crept almost to its summit.
Just under the eastern face of Seefin, at its
very base and extending even a little way
up the mountain steep, reposes the peaceful
little village of Glenosheen."
And then, at the end of that introduction,
he sings his song of praise to Glenosheen:
"Gentle reader, go if you can on some
sunny morning in summer or autumn-let
it be Sunday morning if possible-to the
bottom of the valley near the bank of the
little stream and when you cast your eyes up
to the village and the great green hill over
it, you will admit that not many places
even in our own green island can produce
a prettier or more cheerful prospect.
There is the little hamlet with its whitewashed
cottages gleaming in the morning
beams and from each a column of curling
smoke rises slowly straight up towards the
blue expanse. The base of the mountain is
covered with wood and several clumps of
great trees are scattered here and there
through the village, so that it appears
imbedded in a mass of vegetation, its
pretty cottages peeping out from among
the foliage.
"The land on each side rises gently
towards the mountain, its verdure interspersed
by fields of blossomed potatoes
laughing with joy, or of bright yellow
corn, or more beautiful still, little patches
of flax clothed in their Sunday dress
of light blue. Seefin rises directly over
the village, a perfect cone; white patches
of sheep are scattered here and there over
its bright sunny face; and see, far up towards
the summit, that long line of cattle,
just after leaving Lyre-na-Grena, where
they were driven to be milked, and
grazing quietly along towards Lyre-na-Freaghawn.
The only sounds that catch
your ear are, the occasional crow of a
cock, or the exulting cackle of geese, or
the softened low of a cow may reach you,
floating down the hillside; or the cry of
the herdsman, as with earnest gestures he
endeavours to direct the movements of
the flock.
"But hear that merry laugh. See, it
comes from the brow of the hill where
the women of the village are just coming
into view, returning from Lyre-na-Grena
after milking their cows. Each carries a
pail in one hand and a spancel in the other,
as they approach the village, descending
the steep pathway-the 'Dray-Road,' as
it is called - that leads from 'the Lyre,' a
gabble of voices mingled with laughter
floats over the village, as merry and as
happy as ever rung on human ear. Observe
now they arrive at the village, the group
becomes thinner as they proceed down the
street and at length all again is quietness.
"Happy village! Pleasant scenes of my
childhood! How vividly at this moment do
I behold that green hill-side, as I travel
back in imagination to the days of my
boyhood when I and my little brother
Robert and our companions-all now
scattered over this wide world-ranged
joyful among the glens in search of birds'
nests, or climbed the rocks at its summit,
eager to plant ourselves on its dizzy elevation… " [note: Ibid p. 206.]
P.W. Joyce received his early education
in some of the hedge schools that were
numerous in his part of the country. One
such school that he attended was in
Fanningstown near his home, and the
master there was a man named Conor
Leahy, "a very rough diamond indeed
though a good teacher and not over
severe." One day one of the pupils darted
breathlessly into the school to announce
that Father Bourke was on his way there.
Master and pupils were equally afraid of
Father John, a tall stern-looking man with
heavy brows. The master instantly bounced
up and warned his pupils to be on their
very best behaviour while the priest was
present. He happened to be standing near
the fire-place and he wound up his exhortation
by thumping the hob with his fist and
declaring, "By this stone if one of ye
opens your mouth while the priest is
here, I'll knock his brains out after he's
gone away." The threat had the desired
effect, though in fact, the fear in which
Father Bourke was held was apparently
misplaced for he was at heart a gentle
and kindly man. [note: English as we speak it in Ireland. pp. 71, 161]
One of the ablest of the Munster teachers
at that time was a Patrick Murray who
kept a school in the upper storey of the
market house in Kilfinane. He was particularly
eminent in English Grammar and
Literature. P. W. Joyce went to his school
for one year, when he was very young,
and he tells us that "I am afraid I was
looked upon as very slow, especially in
his pet subject Grammar. I never could be
got to parse correctly such complications
as 'I might, could, would, or should have
been loving' ".
Telling of one of the burning questions
that exercised the learning and logic and
academic energies of a section of the hedge
schoolmasters of the period Joyce says:
"There was one subject that long divided
the teachers of Limerick and Tipperary
into two hostile camps of learning-the
verb to be. There is a well-known rule of
grammar that 'the verb to be takes the
same case after it as goes before it.' One
party headed by the two Dannahys, father
and son, very scholarly men of north
Limerick, held that the verb to be governed
the case following; while the other, at the
head of whom was Mr. Patrick Murray of
Kilfinane in South Limerick, maintained
that the correspondence of the two cases,
after and before, were mere agreement, not
government. And they argued with as much
earnestness as the Continental Nominalists
and Realists of an older time." [note: Ibid pp. 152, 153.]
The young P. W. Joyce also attended
school for a time in Kilmallock. Many
years afterwards when describing in his
book, The Story of Ancient Irish Civilisation
(p. 47) how the students in the old monastic
schools frequently studied in the open, he
was to recall his schooldays in Kilmallock.
"I saw the same custom in full swing"
he wrote, "in some of the lay schools
before 1847. Many a time I prepared my
lesson-with some companions-sitting on
the grass beside the old abbey in Kilmallock
or perched on the top of the ivy-mantled
wall."
He also spent a year attending a science
school kept by a teacher named Simon
Cox in Galbally. It was a rough sort of
school he tells us, but mathematics and the
use of the globes were well taught. There
were about forty students, and of these
half a dozen, including Joyce, were boys;
the rest were men, mostly young, but a
few in middle life. These latter were
schoolmasters - some of them "Poor
Scholars" bent on improving their
knowledge of science in preparation for
the opening of schools in their own districts.
When school was over in the evenings
the "Poor Scholars" all set out in
different directions and called at the farmers'
houses to ask for lodgings, and rarely
were there refusals. In return for food and
lodgings however the "Poor Scholars"
were expected to help the children of the
house at their lessons. [note: Ibid pp. 156, 157.]
In his account of the Galbally school
Joyce marvels at how he escaped being a
smoker after his sojourn there! Most of
the "scholars" smoked, so that the class
room was never quite clear of a fragrant
blue haze. He recalled an occasion when a
class of ten, of which he was one, were
all sitting round the master and all, both
master and scholars, except himself, were
smoking. [note: Ibid p. 158.]
The child is father to the man, and we
can surely see something of the great lover
and collector of Irish music in the following
delightful personal note that Joyce introduces
into his description of the Galbally
school:
"I was the delight and joy of that school,"
he wrote, "for I generally carried in my
pocket a little fife from which I could roll
off jigs, reels, hornpipes, hop-jigs, song
tunes, etc. without limit. The school was
held in a good-sized room in the second
storey of a house of which the landlady
and her family lived in the kitchen and
bedrooms beneath-on the ground floor.
Some dozen or more of the scholars were
always in attendance in the mornings half-an-
hour or so before the arrival of the
master, of whom I was sure to be one - what
could they do without me ?-and
then out came the fife and they cleared the
floor for a dance.
It was simply magnificent to see and hear
those athletic fellows dancing on the bare
boards with their thick-soled, well-nailed
heavy shoes-so as to shake the whole
house. And not one in the lot was more
joyous than I was; for they were mostly
good dancers and did full justice to my
spirited strains. At last in came the master;
there was no cessation, and he took his
seat, looking on complacently 'till that
bout was finished when I put up my fife
and the serious business of the day was
commenced." [note: Ibid pp. 158, 159.] One wonders what the
people who lived on the ground floor
thought of the thick-soled, well-nailed,
heavy boots beating time to the music
upstairs.
The best conducted school Joyce attended
was one kept by a master named John
Condon which was held in the upper
storey of the market house in Mitchelstown
and was attended by Protestants as well as
Catholics. Mr. Condon taught science,
including mathematics, surveying and the
use of the globes, and also geography and
English grammar. He had an assistant who
taught Greek and Latin, and Joyce was one
of the few who attempted the double work
of learning both science and classics. On
Saturdays the students used go out to Mr.
Condon' s farm., complete with theodolite
and chain, to learn surveying. [note: Ibid pp. 155, 156.]
P. W. Joyce remembered the hedge
schools and their masters with affection
and esteem. These schools had their origin
in penal times in Ireland when the Catholic
majority were forbidden by law to have
schools of their own. But they established
their schools despite the law and at great
risk, rude cabins of clay or stone that were
built in a few hours in some remote place,
usually in the shelter of walls, groves or
hedges. Hence the description "hedge
schools," scoileanna scairte or scoileanna cois
claí. The most numerous kind of hedge
schools were those that provided elementary
education; but there was also a kind,
especially in the towns, that answered to
what we now call secondary schools. Of
the hedge schools Joyce attended, four
were of the latter kind. Of the hedge
schools in general he had this to say :
"These schools continued to exist down
to our own time, 'til they were finally
broken up by the famine of 1847. In my
own immediate neighbourhood were some
of them, in which I received my early
education; and I remember with pleasure
several of my old teachers; rough and
unpolished men many of them but excellent
solid scholars and full of enthusiasm
for learning-which enthusiasm they communicated
to their pupils." [note: Ibid p. 151.]
He referred to the schools again when he
came to define "Bog-Latin" in English
as we speak it in Ireland (p. 218), that book
of his on which I have drawn for much of
the biographical material so far set down
in this article. This was what he had to say
of "Bog Latin," a term always used in a
mocking or derogatory sense:-
"Bog latin: bad incorrect Latin; Latin
that had been learned in the hedge schools
among the bogs. This derisive and
reproachful epithet was given in bad old
times by pupils and others of the favoured,
legal and endowed schools, sometimes
with reason but oftener very unjustly.
For those bog or hedge schools sent out
numbers of scholarly men who afterwards
entered the church or lay professions."
There was extraordinary intellectual
activity among the schoolmasters of Joyce's
youth. Some of them., he tells us, thought
and dreamed and talked of nothing else
but learning. In their eyes learning was the
main interest of the world. They often met
on Saturdays to discuss and argue about
knotty points of the classics or of science
or grammar. [note: Ibid p. 152.]
In the little but all too rare pieces of
autobiographical writing that we find
in Joyce's works we get some illuminating
glimpses of the old, homespun life of the
people in pre-Famine times in the Glenosheen
countryside. This, of course, was the
life he himself knew in his youth; the life
that moulded him and left its impress
upon him. He saw the generation that had
crept out of the burrows when the priest-hunting
days were no more. Free to worship
openly again, they had built their
first churches which, however, were called
"chapels" to distinguish them from what
were now the Protestant churches. They
were primitive buildings, these post-Penal
chapels, and Joyce says:
"When I was a boy I generally heard
Mass in one of them, in Ballyorgan, Co.
Limerick: clay floor, no seats, walls of
rough stone unplastered, thatch not far
above our heads. Just over the altar was
suspended a level canopy of thin boards,
to hide the thatch from the sacred spot:
and on its under surface was roughly
painted by some rustic artist a figure of a
dove-emblematic of the Holy Ghost - which
to my childish fancy was a work of
art equal at least to anything ever executed
by Michelangelo. Many and many a time I
heard exhortations from that altar, sometimes
in English, sometimes in Irish, by
the Reverend Darby Buckley, the parish
priest of Glenroe (of which Ballyorgan
formed a part), delivered with such earnestness
and power as to produce extraordinary
effects on the congregation. You saw men
and women in tears everywhere around
you, and at the few words of unstudied
peroration they flung themselves on their
knees in a passionate burst of piety and
sorrow. Ah, God be with Father Darby
Buckley; a small man, full of fire and
energy; somewhat overbearing and rather
severe in judging of small transgressions;
but all the same a great and saintly parish
priest." [note: Ibid p. 146.]
Joyce mentions Father Buckley again in
a note on the march tune, Here's a Health
to Our Leader in his Old Irish Folk Music
and Songs (p. 87).
"I heard this tune," he says, "played on
the Highland pipes by Lewis O'Brien
when I was very young. It was on a Sunday
when good old Dr. Ryan, bishop
of Limerick (who confirmed me), was
coming to administer Confirmation. The
parishioners led by their saintly and active
parish priest, Father Darby Buckley, met
Patrick Weston Joyce
him in a body at the bridge of Barrabunoky
with Lewis O'Brien at the head of the procession
playing all the time with the grand
blue ribbons flying from the tops of the
pipes overhead. And in this manner we
escorted the bishop in honour and glory to
the chapel.''
Joyce tells of an incident that occurred
in the neighbouring parish of Kilfinane at
the close of the eighteenth century, an
incident which indicates clearly how submissive
and servile the post-penal Catholic
population still was in those years, due, no
doubt, to the sense of insecurity that still
pressed heavily on them. There was in
Kilfinane at that time a large thatched
chapel with a clay floor. Father John
Sheehy was appointed parish priest of
Kilfinane in 1798, and on the Monday
morning following his first Mass in the
parish he was astounded to find a man
threshing oats on the chapel floor. The man,
a Catholic, had been sent there to do the
threshing by his master, Captain Charles
Oliver, descendant of a Cromwellian
planter and local lord of the soil.
Father Sheehy, a big brawny man, and
a man of courage and determination,
ordered the workman to betake himself
and his load of oats out of the chapel
forthwith, and told him that if he ever
came back with a load of oats or of anything
else that he'd break his back for
him, and that after that he'd go up and
break his master's back for him too.
Oliver when he heard what had happened
apparently thought it better not to
try out conclusions with the sturdy parish
priest, for in future he sent his corn elsewhere
to be threshed. During the years
that he had been sending his corn to the
chapel to be threshed, Oliver would send
a couple of workmen on Saturday evening
to sweep the floor and clean the place for
Sunday's Mass. Father Sheehy' s predecessor
had, it would seem, never objected to
the use to which his church was being put
but, as Joyce surmises, "It is likely enough
indeed that he himself got a few scratches
in his day from the penal laws and thought
it as well to let matters go quietly." [note: Ibid pp. 147, 148.]
P. W. Joyce remembered Father Sheehy
as a very old man. He died on 24th
October, 1844, aged ninety-five, having
been then forty-six years parish priest of
Kilfinane. [note: The Diocese of Limerick from 1691 to Present Time. Begley. p. 628.]
It took a man of some courage to stand
up to Captain Oliver, for he virtually held
the lives of the local people in his hands.
He it was who had the well-loved United
Irishman, William ("Staker") Wallis
hanged in Kilfinane in the July of 1798,
after first having him flogged through the
streets of the town and at the fair of Ballinvreena.
The air of the Lament for Staker
Wallis, full of a people's heartbreak, is one
of the loveliest of our caointe.
A term common in Joyce's youth was
Oliver's Summons. At harvest time if
Captain Oliver had any difficulty in getting
the local men to work for him he would
send round the district a couple of his
servants with a horse and cart who seized
some necessary article in each house - a
spinning wheel, a bed, the pot, the single
table, etc. and brought them all, body and
bones, and kept them impounded. Not until
somebody from the houses in question
came and worked at the harvesting would
the seized goods be returned. Oliver,
however, paid his reluctant workmen for
their labour. [note: English as we speak it in Ireland pp. 184, 185.]
As a youth Joyce saw some of the famous
cross-country hurling matches - designated
scuaibín - between parish and parish, with
at least five hundred engaged on each side;
but that, he adds, was in the time of the
eight millions - before l847. [note: Ibid p. 276.] The Famine
of Black '47 was obviously the great
watershed in his life and in the lives of
his contemporaries. And he saw faction
fights, with sticks and stones, between
the "Three Year Olds" and the "Four
Year Olds" [note: Ancient Irish Music. P. W. Joyce p. 32.] at the fairs of Ardpatrick and
Kildorrery; and enjoyed watching them,
keeping a safe distance however for fear
of a flying stone! [note: English as we speak it in Ireland p. 342.]
There can have been very few others
who, in the fleeting years of boyhood,
absorbed so much of the heritage and the
character and the very feel of their native
place as did P. W. Joyce. Glenosheen and
its people influenced him for all time; they
enriched him and made him what he was.
No matter where he might be in after
years the inner eye was always focussed
on the hoary height of Seefin, and the ear
of memory still heard the loved songs and
music and speech of the Ballahoura
country. This is not a little surprising when
we consider that for considerable parts of
his boyhood he was away from his own
immediate district, attending school in
such places as Kilmallock, Galbally and
Mitchelstown. And he was only eighteen
Robert Dwyer Joyce
years old when the Commissioners of
National Education employed him as a
teacher.
He quickly made his mark in his chosen
profession and before long was appointed
principal of the Model School in Clonmel.
In 1856 he was one of the fifteen teachers
selected and trained to reorganise the
National School system.[note: Article-"Yesterday"-by D. F. Moore in Evening Press, 16,9,1959.] Though a
busy man in many spheres, he found time
to pursue a course of studies in Trinity
College, Dublin, which earned him his
B.A. degree in 861 and his M.A. degree
in 1864. And in 1870 Trinity awarded him
the honorary degree of LL.D. Four years
later he became Principal of the Board of
Education's Training College in Marlborough
Street, Dublin, which post he
occupied until he retired in 1893. Drawing
on his own experience and observations
as a teacher he wrote a number of books
which were of much value to other
teachers. They included A Handbook of
School Management, The Teaching of Manual
Work in Schools The Geography of the
Counties of Ireland, How to Prepare for
Civil Service Competitions. By becoming
Principal of the Training College in Dublin,
P. W. Joyce had reached the highest office
in his profession, no mean achievement for
a product of the rural hedge schools. But
despite his achievements in the field of
education it is not as a teacher or educationalist
he is best remembered to-day
but as historian, collector of music, elucidator
of place names and lifelong and loving
recorder of the Irish past.
There was many a man in Ireland in
the early years of this century who first
became acquainted with Irish history in
the pages of Joyce's A Child's History of
Ireland, which was published in 1898.
This book was formally approved for use
in the national schools in Ireland by the
Commissioners of National Education. A
criticism sometimes levelled against the
book is that its treatment of Irish history
is too "safe," that it lacks colour and is not
sufficiently inspiring. As against that one
must remember that the attitude of the
Commissioners to Irish nationality and
Irish political aspirations had changed but
little since the days when they had sanctioned
for use in Irish schools a reading
book that contained the following "poem"
which the pupils were required to learn
and commit to memory:-
I thank the goodness and the grace
Which on my birth have smiled,
And made me in these Christian days
A happy English child.
Joyce's great achievement surely was
that he was able to write a history of Ireland
that the Commissioners felt was objective
enough to sanction for use in their schools
and yet, that this history, in so far as it
could do so within the limits of five
hundred pages, gave the pupils a complete
and true account of the fortunes of their
country from pagan times right up to the
Famine period and the death of Daniel
O'Connell. Joyce accomplished a minor
revolution when he succeeded in putting a
history of Ireland into the hands of the
pupils in the national schools for the first
time.
A Child's History of Ireland was an
attractive little book and was copiously
illustrated. The illustrations must have
aroused much interest; indeed one might
say that they comprised a history within a
history. The frontispiece was a colour
reproduction of the beautiful ninth-century
illuminated Book of Mac Durnan; and
among the illustrations in the body of the
book were pictures of Irish leaders like
Eoghan Rua O Neill, O Sullivan Beara and
Sarsfield; a picture of the field in Ballyneety
where Sarsfield destroyed the siege
train; facsimiles of the signatures of such
figures as Gearóid Iarla, Shane O'Neill
and Red Hugh O'Donnell.
In the course of his preface to the book
Joyce said:
" ... My constant aim has been to nuke
the book easy to read and easy to understand.
Above all I have tried to write
soberly and moderately, avoiding exaggeration
and bitterness, pointing out extenuating
circumstances where it was just and
right to do so, giving credit where credit
is due and showing fair play all round. A
writer may accomplish all this while
sympathising heartily, as I do, with Ireland
and her people. Perhaps this book, written
as it is in such a broad and just spirit, may
help to foster mutual feelings of respect
and toleration among Irish people of
different parties and may teach them. to
love and admire what is great and noble
in their history, no matter where found.
This indeed was one of the objects I kept
steadily in view while writing it. When a
young citizen of Limerick and another of
Derry read the account given here of the
two memorable sieges I hope it is not too
much to expect that the reader in each case,
while feeling a natural pride in the part
played by his own ancestors, will be moved
to a just and generous admiration for those
of the other side who so valiantly defended
their homes. And the History of Ireland,
'though on the whole a very sad history,
abounds in records of heroic deeds and
heroic endurance, like those of Derry and
Limerick, which all Irish people of the
present day ought to look back to with
pride and which all young persons should
be taught to reverence and admire."
He further expressed a hope that his
Child's History of Ireland, "though written
primarily for children, might also be found
interesting and instructive by older people."
Finally, he said:
"It may not be unnecessary to say that,
except in a few places where I quote, the
narrative all through this book is original
and not made up by adapting or copying
the texts of other modern Irish histories.
For good or for bad I preferred my way of
telling the story."
Over 80,000 copies of A Child's History
of Ireland were sold. It was adopted by
the Australian Catholic Hierarchy as a text
book for all their schools in Australia and
New Zealand, and was also adopted by
the Catholic School Board of New York.
Another of Joyce's histories, Outlines of
the History of Ireland, sold over 70.000
copies. These were the first popular
histories of Ireland, and since they were
sold and read in thousands, it would be
interesting to know how much they contributed
towards preparing the way for the
great national revival that led, step by step,
to Easter Week, 1916.
It certainly was not Joyce's fault if the
majority of Irishmen were not acquainted
with their country's history, for in addition
to A Child's History of Ireland and
Outlines of the History of Ireland, there came
also from his pen the following works:
A Short History of Ireland, The Story of
Ancient Irish Civilisation, A Concise History
of Ireland, A Reading Book in Irish History,
A Social History of Ancient Ireland (in two
large volumes) and A Smaller Social
History of Ancient Ireland. Incidentally, it
might also be mentioned that he wrote
A Concise History of Rome. As well, Joyce
had set about making available Keating's
seventeenth-century history of Ireland,
Foras Feasa ar Eirinn, complete with
English translation, notes and vocabulary.
Only part I and II of the history was
published, these in a volume entitled
"Keating" for Students of Gaelic. It is thought
that the reason for his discontinuing the
editing and translating of Keating was the
more ambitious decision of the Irish Texts
Society to publish the Foras Feasa in four
handsome volumes. [note: Article-"The Joyce Brothers from Limerick"-by Cathal O'Shannon, Evening Press, 19,1,1962.]
A Social History of Ancient Ireland is a
work that has so far not been superseded,
dealing as it does with a side of our history
that has been almost completely neglected
in the ordinary history books, which
chiefly concentrate on military and political
events. A Social History of Ancient Ireland
treats of such things as the family in ancient
Ireland; the house; food, fuel and light;
dress and personal adornment; agriculture
and pasturage; corn mills; public assemblies,
sports and pastimes; social customs and
observances; the Brehon Laws; art; medicine
and medical doctors; death and burial.
Joyce truly observed in his introduction
to this work that "An important function
of History is to depict social and domestic
life. If we wish to obtain a clear view of
the general state of any particular country
in past times, we shall need to have a good
knowledge of the people, high and low,
rich and poor; their standards of civilisation,
religion and learning; their virtues,
and failings; their industries, occupations
and amusements; their manners and customs;
and the sort of life they led day by
day in their homes."
Already, as early as 1879, Joyce had
produced his Old Celtic Romances, retellings
in English translation of twelve famous
tales from Irish mythology: The Fate of
the Children of Lir; The Fate of the Children
of Turenn; Connla of the Golden Hair; The
Overflowing of Loch Neagh; The Voyage
of Maildun; The Fairy Palace of the Quicken
Trees; The Pursuit of the Giolla Dacker and
his Horse; The Pursuit of Dermot and Grania;
The Chase of Slieve Cullinn; the Chase of
Slieve Fuad; Oisin in Tír na nOg; The Fate
of the Sons of Usna.
He wrote a very informative preface
for this work, supplied helpful notes and
appended a list of proper names with
their original Irish forms. In the preface
Joyce observed that
"Scraps and fragn1ents of some of these
tales have been given to the world in
popular publications, by writers who not
being able to read the originals took their
information from printed books in the
English language. But many of these
specimens have been presented in a very
unfavourable and unjust light-distorted
to make them look funny and their characters
debased to the mere modern conventional
stage Irishman. There is none of
this silly and odious vulgarity in the
originals of these fine old tales which are
high and dignified in tone and feeling - quite
as much so as the old Romantic
tales of Greece and Rome."
He went on: ..
"A translation may either follow the
very words, or reproduce the life and spirit
of the original; but no translation can do
both. If you render word for word you
loose the spirit; if you wish to give the
spirit and manner you must depart from
the exact words and frame your own
phrases. I have chosen this latter course."
And having decided on this course when
he set about translating the tales, he did
his best he says "to render them into simple,
homely English . . . as I conceive the old
shanachies themselves would have told
them if they had used English instead of
Gaelic."
Of course Joyce's English, like the English
of O'Curry and O'Donovan, was never an
Englishman's English and this, despite the
fact that Joyce, as he tells us himself, did
for a time endeavour to cultivate a genuine
English style. "In early youth," he wrote,
"I was a diligent student of English style;
and in order to select or form a style for
myself I read the best authors :-Addison,
Steele, Swift, Johnson, Goldsmith, etc ....
Johnson dazzled me for a time-especially
in Rasselas; but I soon found out that he
is not a desirable model to follow-so
far as style is concerned-and I gave up
imitating him. In the end indeed-' though
after much time and labour-which I think
were not wasted-I ceased to imitate
anyone and struck out for myself " [note: Wonders of Ireland p. 115.]
The fact which Joyce could not alter was
that Irish was his native language and that
for him. English would remain an acquired
language.
James Joyce came up against this problem
of the Irishman's ability to handle English.
In A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man
there is a discussion between the student
Stephen Dedalus (James Joyce) and an
English-born Jesuit that hinges on the usage
of certain English words. And Stephen is
made to meditate as follows:
"The language in which we are speaking
is his before it is mine. How different are
the words home, Christ, ale, master, on his
lips and on mine! I cannot speak or write
these words without unrest of spirit. His
language, so familiar and so foreign, will
always be for me an acquired speech. I
have not made or accepted its words. My
voice holds them at bay. My soul frets in
the shadow of his language."
In introducing the tales in Old Celtic
Romances P. W. Joyce refers to the fact that
in many of the tales ''the leading characters
are often made to express themselves in
verse, or some striking incident of the
story is repeated in a poetical form". Joyce
repeated this practice in his translations,
and his facility in turning a verse is seen in
the following lines from Connla of the
Golden Hair:-
A pleasant land of winding vales, bright
streams and verdurous plains,
Where summer all the live-long year, in
change less splendour reigns;
A peaceful land of calm delight, of
everlasting bloom;
Old age and death we never know, no
Sickness, care, or gloom;
The land of youth,
Of love and truth,
From pain and sorrow free;
The land of rest,
In the golden west,
On the verge of the azure sea!
-or in these verses describing one of the
many wonders seen by Maildun and his
crew during their Voyage:-
In a wall-circled isle a big monster they
found.
With a hide like an elephant, leathery
and bare;
He threw up his heels with a wonderful
Bound,
And ran round the isle with the speed
of a hare.
But a feat more astounding has yet to be
told:
He turned round and round in his
leathery skin;
His bones and his flesh and his sinews he
Rolled -
He was resting outside while he twisted
within!
Then, changing his practice with marvellous
Skill,
His carcase stood rigid and round went
his hide;
It whirled round his bones like the wheel
of a mill – 
He was resting within while he twisted
outside!
Next, standing quite near on a green little
Hill,
After galloping round in the very same
Track,
While the skin on his belly stood perfectly
Still,
Like a millstone he twisted the skin of
his back!
But Maildun and his men put to sea in
their boat,
For they saw his two eyes looking over
the wall;
And they knew by the way that he opened
his throat,
He intended to swallow them, curragh
and all!
In a note on that final verse Joyce says:
"The verse in the original is quite serious;
but I could not resist the temptation to
give it a humorous turn".
When I was in second or third standard
in the primary school one of the teachers
used take us for the last quarter of an hour
of the school day and read an instalment
from Old Celtic Romances for us. The
reading of a complete story from the book
might be spread over the most of a week;
and I remember how enthralled we were
by the stories, and with what impatience
we'd look forward to 3 o'clock when we'd
sit in the back desk to hear the master read
the next thrilling episode from the tale of
the Giolla Deacair or from the Fate of the
Sons of Usna.
We thus became acquainted with our
own mythology, and the duchas in us responded
to it, in much the same way that an
Irish countryman's feet will respond to the
rhythm of reel or jig or hornpipe, for the
race, it would seem, will always yearn for
that which itself has produced and shaped.
Ideally, of course, we should have heard the
tales in Irish, but our knowledge of Irish
at that time was not sufficient for our
understanding and enjoying of them.
Hearing them in English was the next best
thing.
The work which most contributed to
making Joyce's name widely known and
which has kept it before the public ever
since was his three-volume study of The
Origin and History of Irish Names of Places.
It was to be the most permanent of his
works, and he chose as his motto for it the
words of the fourteenth-century topographical
writer, Sean Mór Ó Dubhagain:
Triallam timcheall na Fódhla-Let us journey
round Fodhla (Ireland). Ní bhfonn saoi gan
locht, or, if you like, even Homer nods, and
Joyce was not always right about the
derivations of particular place-names.
Furthermore, since his time new sources of
information on place-names have come to
light and, besides, other workers in this
field have made special studies of the place-names
of particular districts and are more
authoritative for these districts than Joyce
is. But having said all that one must then
add that The Origin and History of Irish
Names of Places is still an important work of
reference, and has not been superseded, for
it alone treats of the place-names of the
whole country. And here we might quote
from one commentator's opinion of the
work:
"His (Joyce's) treatment of this technical
subject was most happy; the broad effects
of legend, folklore and history cover the
dry bones of etymology and led many into
this and like fields of Irish work that might
have been repelled by other writers ...
However much scientific workers may
traverse many of his derivations, based
rather on popular forms than on those of
the records, they will long continue to use
the bulk of his work and to admire the
whole". [note: Obituary in Journal of Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, 45 (1915) 69-71.]
From the information he had gathered
together in the three volumes of The
Origin and History of Irish Names of Places
Joyce compiled a very useful little volume
called Irish Local Names Explained, in which
he gives the derivations of some thousands
of our place-names.
English as we speak it in Ireland, published
in 1910, is perhaps the most interesting of
Joyce's books. The Anglo-Irish dialectical
words and phrases discussed by him in this
book derived, he explains, from three main
sources:
"First: the Irish language. Second: Old
English and the dialect of Scotland. Third:
independently of these two sources, dialectical
expressions have gradually grown
up among our- English-speaking people,
as dialects arise everywhere".
There are phrases that we use every day
in English, unaware of the fact that they
are pure Irishisms which would never be
heard on the lips of an Englishman. Dozens
of such phrases will be found in English as
we speak it in Ireland. For example, in Irish
we say of a man who died: Fuair se bas;
literally, "he found (or got) death". And
this usage has resulted in such a common
saying in Hiberno-English as "Come in out
of the rain or you'll get your death". And
very few Irishmen would find anything
unusual about such a description as "a fool
of a man". And yet this is a direct translation
of a purely Irish usage, amadan fir.
English as we speak it in Ireland contains a
vocabulary of hundreds of words, some of
them Irish, some of them Old English or
Scots, some nondescript, that coloured, and
that in some cases still colour the English
spoken in Ireland. A few examples will
suffice.
"baan: a field covered with short grass:
-'a baan field': 'a baan of cows': i.e. a
grass farm with its proper number of cows.
Irish ban".
"by the same token: this needs no
explanation; it is a survival from Tudor
English''.
"chook chook (the oo sounded rather
short); a call for hens-it is the Irish tioc".
"coldoy: a bad halfpenny; a spurious
worthless article of jewellery.
"greedy-gut: a glutton; a person who
is selfish about stuffing himself, wishing to
give nothing to anybody else".
"shoonaun: a deep circular basket, made
of twisted rushes or straw and lined with
calico; it had a cover and was used for
holding linen, clothes, &c. (Limerick and
Cork). From Irish sibhinn (shiven), a rush,
a bulrush: of which the diminutive
siubhnan (shoonaun) is our word: signifying
'made of rushes'. Many a shoonaun
I saw in my day; and I remember meeting
a man who was a shoonaun maker by
trade".
In various places in English as we speak it
in Ireland Joyce illustrates the usage of some
word, or the prevalence of some custom or
tradition by reference to things he himself
heard or saw in pre-Famine times in his
own district. In this way we learn much
about how the old life was lived in his part
of the country. And as well, we learn a
little about Joyce himself, for English as we
speak it in Ireland is the only one of his books
in which he tells us anything worthwhile
about his youth in Glenosheen.
Fifteen years before the founding of the
Gaelic League, that is to say in the year
1878, Joyce, who was a member of the
Society for the Preservation of the Irish
Language, compiled A Grammar of the
Irish Language) a useful and well-planned
little book running to one hundred and
thirty- six pages. It was, as Joyce observed,
"low enough in price to be within reach of
the many". A copy of the l897 edition,
which I have before me as I write, states,
Price to National Schools, 6d.
Joyce's The Wonders of Ireland, published
in 1911, contains an interesting assortment
of folklore, essays and stories. One of the
stories is titled Garrett Mac Eniry) and in an
introductory note Joyce says: "I wrote this
little story when I was very young and put
it aside for some years. It was published in
the year 1857 in a local newspaper, The
Tipperary Leader-over the pen-name
'Carnferay': my first appearance in print.
It represents faithfully the dialect of the
Limerick peasantry of seventy years ago
which I think is still much the same as it
was then. Most or all of the scenes and
incidents are depicted from real life, as I
witnessed them in my boyhood and youth".
Garrett Mac Eniry is the simple, pathetic
story of an old couple who have seen all
their children grow up and die, and who
are left alone at the end of their days in a
little village, where practically all the
inhabitants are Palatines who are slowly
learning Irish ways. When his wife dies the
old man's world collapses about him.
Everything he rests his eyes on is so charged
with memories that he cannot bear to look
on them anymore, and he leaves home and
goes off to find a brother whom he has not
seen since youth, but who now becomes
for him the only anchor that will hold in
the storm. For one so young as Joyce was
when he wrote it, this story of Garrett Mac
Eniry shows an unusual understanding of,
and sympathy with, the ways of old people
and a keen perception of the elements of
which grief is compounded.
Among the other items in The Wonders
of Ireland there is a very readable essay on
Spenser's Irish Rivers, in which Joyce
establishes the identity of the rivers and
other physical features mentioned by
Spenser in the Faerie Queene, the Two
Cantos of Mutabilitie and Colin Clouts come
home again. Kilcolman, where Spenser
lived, lies on the opposite side of the
Ballahouras from Glenosheen.
The wonders which Joyce tells about in
The Wonders of Ireland were first described
in such ancient works as the Book of
Ballymote and Giraldus Cambrensis'
Topography of Ireland, in which there is a
long chapter headed, Of the Wonders and
Miracles of Ireland. The "wonders" recounted
in Joyce's book include: A Ship
and Crew in the Air, A Steeple of fire in the
Air, An Island split in three by a Storm, The
Man - wolves of Ossory, The loney Crane of
Inishkea) The Bleeding Stone.
It is generally agreed that the most
important books Joyce left us were not any
of the ones so far listed-valuable though
many of these were-but his four collections of music and song: Ancient Irish
Music, Irish Music and Song, Irish Peasant
Songs in the English Language, Old Irish
Folk Music and Songs.
There are over a hundred airs in Ancient
Irish Music (published in l872) as well as
the words in Irish or English that go with
many of the airs. One of the airs is named
Mor Chluana (More of Cloyne) and in a
note on the air Joyce says:
"I took down this fine tune in l852 from
Lewis O'Brien of Coolfree in the county
Limerick; who stated that More was the
guardian fairy of Cloyne . . . ".
Mor Chluana is in fact the tune that was
being mentioned as a likely National
Anthem some twenty or more years ago by
a considerable body of opinion which held
that this tune had everything that Amhrán
na bhFiann, or the Soldiers’ Song, lacked in
dignity and beauty. Irish words, composed
by Osborn Ó hAimhirgín, had by then been
wed to the tune of Mor Chluana, and both
tune and song were now known as An
tAmhran Dochais (The Song of Hope). But
its associations with the fight for freedom
won the day for Amhran na bhFiann, and it
still remains our National Anthem. The
claims of An tAmhrán Dochais however were
not altogether dismissed, for it was selected
as the Taoiseach’s Salute, and is now played
on the Taoiseach's arrival at formal
occasions. Of this tune, which Joyce wrote
down from his neighbour, Lewis O'Brien,
in l852, and which was one day to be
mentioned as a likely National Anthem,
Colm Ó Lochlainn had this to say in his
booklet, Anglo-Irish Song-Writers since
Moore:
"This is a very noble tune, full of dignity and
one which might well serve as National
Anthem or Processional March. It has a
solemn rhythm comparable to Haydn’s famous
Austrian Emperor’s Hymn.”
Joyce's Irish Music and Song contains only
songs in the Irish language. This collection
was prepared by Joyce for the Society for
the Preservation of the Irish Language.
It was after he had gone to reside in
Dublin that Joyce began to think seriously
about collecting and publishing as much as
he could of the large body of Irish song and
music that still survived. Always a lover of
Irish music, he was surprised when he
examined the published collections to
discover that a great number of beautiful
tunes that he himself knew were unpublished.
He made this discovery in the
year 1853 through his acquaintance with
Doctor George Petrie, who was then
engaged in editing his Ancient Music of
Ireland. Mainly through Petrie's example
and, indeed, partly at his suggestion, he set
about writing down all the airs he could
remember, a task that would continue to
engage him to the very end of his long and
industrious life.
During vacations he collected tunes and
songs in all parts of the country, but
principally in the South, noting down
whatever he thought worthy, both music
and words. He used to give his collections
to Petrie, but kept copies of them. Petrie
afterwards incorporated them in his own
collection, with due acknowledgments to
Joyce. Incidentally, it was on those occasions
while he was travelling round the country
collecting the old songs and music that
Joyce first became interested in place-names.
He wrote them down and checked on
their meanings locally, thus laying the
foundations of his three-volume work on
The Origin and History of Irish Names of
Places. He must have had his pockets full of
scraps of paper covered with notes at that
time. He tells us :
"In the year 1852 when I was drawing up
from my memory for Doctor Petrie all the
airs I could think of-and for that purpose
commonly carried a bit of music paper in
my waistcoat pocket-I woke up from
sleep one night whistling this fine air ("The
Orangeman") in a dream: an air which I
had forgotten for years. Greatly delighted,
I started up: a light, a pencil and a bit of
paper and there was the first bar securely
captured: the bird was, as it were, caught
and held by the tail". [note: Old Irish Folk Music and Songs. P. W.Joyce. p. 4.]
Joyce's first collection of music was his
Old Irish Folk Music and Songs, which was
published in 1909 and which contains eight
hundred and twenty- four airs that had
never previously been published. A large
number of these airs came from his native
district, and to that district, for all that it
had given him, he paid his tribute in the
preface, saying:
"I spent all my early life in a part of the
county Limerick where music, singing and
dancing were favourite amusements. My
home in Glenosheen, in the heart of the
Ballahoura mountains, was a home of
music and song: they were in the air of the
valley; you heard them everywhere - sung,
played, whistled; and they were
mixed up with the people's pastimes,
occupations and daily life. 'Though we had
pipers, fiddlers, fifers, whistlers and singers
of our own, wandering musicians were
welcomed; and from every one some
choice air or song that struck our fancy was
sure to be learned and stored up to form
part of an ever- growing stock of minstrelsy.
As I loved the graceful music of the people
from my childhood, their songs, dance
tunes, keens, and lullabies remained in my
memory, almost without any effort of my
own: so that ultimately I became, as it were,
the general and it may be said the sole,
legatee of all this long-accumulating
treasure of melody".
And he added, with justified pride in
having grown up in such an environment:
"It will be seen then that my knowledge
Of Irish music, such as it is, did not come to
me from the outside in after-life, or by a
late study, as a foreign language is learned
but grew up from within during childhood
and boyhood, to form part of my mind,
like my native language".
He remembered all the old neighbours
from whom he had collected songs and
tunes, and all through the book-and
through his other collections as well - there
are the characteristic notes of
acknowledgment:
"From the playing of Ned Goggin, the
Glenosheen fiddler.''
"From Norry Dwane of Glenosheen,
l846".
"From John Hickey of Ballyorgan".
"From Phil Gleeson of Coolfree near
Ballyorgan, noted singer and whistler".
"From Davy Cleary, piper and dancing
master, Kilfinane, 1842".
"From the singing of Mrs. Mary
Mac Sweeny (his aunt) of Glenosheen".
"From Lewis O'Brien of Coolfree".
"From Bill Sheedy, pipe-player
Fanningstown, Co. Limerick, 1844".
"From Davy Condon, thatcher, of
Ballyorgan, l844".
"From John Dolan of Glenosheen, 1845".
"From Mick Dinneen, Coolfree".
"From the singing of Joe Martin of
Kilfinane, Co. Limerick, 1852. He sang an
Irish song to it (the tune) of which this is
the first verse:
'Mo chreach a’s mo dhiachairt gan ceo
draíochta ar na bóithribh
A’s go siulfainn san oíche lem’ chroí geal na
glóire...’”
Some of the notes are full of interest,
capturing for us echoes of a world that has
completely vanished, as this note in Old
Irish Folk Music and Song on the tune, A
Mhaire’s a Mhuirnín, which Joyce directed
to be played "with the variations and
ornamentations of the Munster pipers and
fiddlers":
"I heard O'Hannigan, a great Munster
piper-blind-play these variations (in
Mitchelstown, Co. Cork: l844)-the runs
all staccato-with amazing brilliancy and
perfection of execution".
Or this note from the same collection
(p. 38) on the tune, Cois taoibh a’ Chuain:
“When I learned this tune from the singing
of my grandmother about 1850 she was
then 90 years of age: she told me she learned
it by hearing it played on the violin by her
grandmother".
Joyce also learned many airs and songs
from his father. Alice Kenny, an old woman
from the parish of Glenroe, was another
person who supplied him with songs.
Among the songs he wrote down from her
in the summer of 1853 was one called An
Ceo Draíochta and he says, in Ancient Irish
Music (p. 42):-
"I cannot forbear recalling the circumstances
under which I obtained this air. I
had often heard of old Alice Kenny who -
was at this time about 70 years of age, as a
noted singer in her time; and I set out one
day to visit her. When I arrived at her
house her grandchildren told me she was
up somewhere on the neighbouring hill;
so I and my companion set out in search of
her; and we found her on the very top,
pulling heath to cook her supper. We sat
down by a turf- rick and there for two
hours she delighted me and delighted
herself with her inexhaustible store of Irish
airs and songs of all kinds-love songs,
keens) lullabies, execution songs, etc. I took
down several and left her, determined to
renew my visit at the first opportunity.
But no opportunity came; and I have never
seen poor old Alice from that day to this".
One finds it difficult to resist the temptation
to go on quoting from the notes one
finds in the Joyce collections of music. But
one more will have to suffice. This note
(from Old Irish Folk Music and Song), a
beautiful and evocative description, deals
with the song, An Clar Bog Deil) a song
also known as Cois na Bride or Caiseal
Mumhan. Joyce says:
"I once heard 'Cashel of Munster’ sung
under peculiarly pleasant and characteristic
circumstances when I was a mere child. The
people of the village had turned out on a sunny
day in June to 'foot’ the half-dry turf in the bog
at the back of Seefin mountain which rises
straight over Glenosheen: always a joyous
occasion for us children. Dinner time came - about
1 o’ clock: each family spread the white
cloth on a chosen spot on the dry clean bog
surface. There might have been half a dozen
groups in that part of the bog, all near each
other and all sat down to dinner at the same
time: glorious smoking hot floury savoury
potatoes, salt herrings (hot like the potatoes)
and good wholesome blathach, i.e. skimmed
thick milk slightly and pleasantly sour-a
dinner fit for a hungry king.
After dinner there was always a short
interval for rest and diversion-generally rough
joyous romping. On this occasion the people,
with one accord, asked Peggy Moynahan to sing
them a song. Peggy was a splendid girl, noted
for her singing: and down she sat willingly on
a turf bank. In a moment the people clustered
round, all play and noise and conversation
ceased; and she gave us the Clar Bog Deil in
Irish with intense passion, while the people - old
and young, including myself and my little
brother, Robert - sat and listened, mute and
spellbound”.
And looking back over the vanished
years, he added :
"I have good reason to fear that the taste for
intellectual and refined amusements-singing,
music, dancing, story-telling, small informal
literary clubs and meetings, etc.-once so
prevalent among the people of my native
district, which often expressed itself in scenes
such as I describe here, is all gone; and we shall
never witness the like again. Is mór an trua e.
More’s the pity”!
Joyce retired from his post as Principal
of Marlborough Street Training College
in 1893, at the age of sixty-six, and it was
from that time onward that he wrote most
of his books. The zeal and devotion he
brought to his chosen task of preserving
knowledge of the past for future generations
was remarkable. As a man Joyce
remained very much a countryman. "He
was a retiring unpretentious man ... was
happiest at his studies and never sought the
limelight". [note: Article-"Yesterday" -by D. F. Moore in Evening Press, 17,9,1959.] He interested himself and
distinguished himself in many fields, but
it was to the collection of the old songs and
music of Ireland he really gave his heart. In
his youth he had taken intense delight in
the musicians and singers of his native
The village of Glenosheen with Seefin in the background.
Glenosheen and, to misquote Wordsworth
ever so slightly-
The music in his heart he bore
Long after it was heard no more.
He acted as music adjudicator at the very
first Oireachtas organised by the Gaelic
League, and was on the panel of adjudicators
for the Dublin Feis Cheoil. He was a
member of a number of learned societies
and of more popular societies devoted to
Irish culture. For many years he was an
active member of the Royal Irish Academy
and of the Royal Society of Antiquaries,
being elected president of the latter society
in 1906. As well, he was one of the
commissioners concerned in the publication
of the Brehon Laws.
In 1856 he married Caroline, daughter of
Lieutenant John Waters, of Baltinglass, by
whom he had three sons and two daughters.
His eldest son, Weston St. John Joyce, was
the author of a popular book called Dublin
and its Neighbourhood.
Patrick Weston Joyce died at his home,
Barnalee, Rathmines, on 7 January, 1914,
at the age of eighty-seven. He had been ill
for five weeks but almost to the very end
he had continued to work on a further
collection of Irish music which he had
hoped to see published. Few men can have
loved the old songs, the old music, the old
traditions of Ireland better than he. He was
buried in Glasnevin on 9 January, 1914.
The tributes paid to him were many. In
the course of an Obituary in the Irish
Independent of 10 January, 1914, Eoghan
Ó Neachtain wrote:
"Ta an Dr. P. Seoighe tar eis bhais, go
ndeana Dia trócaire ar a anam! Is fada an saol
a fuair se ... agus is fóinteach an chaoi ar
chaith se a la, is fóinteach an chaoi, deirim, ar
chaith se e ... Fear cliste a bhí ann ó thus agus
fear ioldanach ó thus go deireadh ... Scríobh
se . . . leabhar do phaistí ag insint stair na
hEireann. Ta an leabhar sin le fail fós agus
ceann níos deise na e níl ann i leith pictiúir ag
cur síos ar dheise agus ar mhaise dana in
Eirinn. Scríobh se gráimear Gaeilge roimh
aimsir Chonradh na Gaeilge agus ba mhór an
leas do lucht foghlama na teanga an leabhar
sin ... Solas na bhFlaitheas go dtuga Dia don
udar a chaith a dhuthracht ar son na hEireann".
A writer in the Journal of the Royal Society
of Antiquaries (Vol. 45 (1915) 69-71) paying
tribute to him, spoke of Joyce having been
born
" . in sight of the Ballahoura Mountains
and the Galtees and, as so often, the impression
of the surroundings of his boyhood left its mark
on all his after life. In one of his books,
English as we speak it in Ireland, he gives us
clues to these influences, recollections of the
passionate piety of the peasantry in the little
thatched, earth-floored chapel, of the rough but
scholarly hedge schoolmasters, of the dancers
for whom (like another Goldsmith) he played
on the fife, and of the traditions of the glens and
fields ....”
In the course of his lifetime Joyce amassed
a great amount of knowledge about his
native country, knowledge, very much of
which might have otherwise been lost. And
tireless as he was in the amassing of this
knowledge he was equally tireless in
imparting it to others. In all, he wrote
thirty books, twenty-four of them about
Ireland; and in the Royal Irish Academy
and the National Library there are manuscript
collections of music that he never
lived to publish.
P. W. Joyce followed in the footsteps of
Bunting and Petrie, of O'Donovan and
O'Curry, reaching, however, a larger
public than any of these four had reached,
for the fields he laboured in were more
numerous and, as well as that, he principally
wrote not for scholars but for the ordinary
people of Ireland, people such as he had
known in that lovely and never-forgotten
countryside round about Glenosheen.
Robert Dwyer Joyce
Robert Dwyer Joyce, P. W's brother,
was born in Glenosheen in 1830 and, like
his brother, was educated in local hedge-schools.
At school he was soon to prove
himself of more than average intelligence,
displaying in particular an aptitude for
languages. While still in his teens he entered
the service of the Commissioners of
National Education and trained as a teacher.
For several further years he continued to
study under the direction of his brother,
P. W., whom he was eventually to replace
as Principal of the Clonmel Model School,
when P. W. was chosen by the Commissioners
to do a special course of study in
connection with the reorganisation of the
National School system.
In 1857 he resigned his post as teacher
and went to Queen's College, Cork, where
he studied medicine, taking his M.D. in
1865. During his time at Queen's College
he won a number of scholarships and
prizes, but since these sources were not
adequate to keep him and pay for his
studies he supplemented them through
part- time teaching and through his
writings. He contributed poems, articles
and stories to such papers as Nation, Harp
(Cork), Dublin Saturday Magazine, The
Celt, Irishman, Irish People (this was the
organ of Fenianism) and The Universal
News1 this latter a Catholic paper published
in London, the editor at that time being
John Francis O'Donnell, a gifted young
Limerick poet. Joyce's contributions to
these papers usually appeared above the
pen-name "Feardana," or, someti1nes,
"Merulan."
His first collection of poems appeared in
1861, under the title Ballads, Romances and
Songs . This is the collection which in a
later edition, and with additions, was to
appear under the title, Ballads of Irish
Chivalry.
Joyce's first love was literature, and even
after he had taken his M.D. we find him
accepting the post of Professor of English
Literature in the Preparatory Department
of the Catholic University in Dublin. Soon
afterwards he was elected member of the
Royal Irish Academy, his sponsors being
the Earl of Dunraven and Professor Kells
Ingram, the latter author of the famous
song, Who fears to speak of ‘98.
Joyce, an ardent believer in Irish freedom,
had been attracted to the Fenian movement,
and his contributions to the nationalist
journals of the time bear testimony to the
strength of the views he held as to Ireland's
right to be free. Marcus Bourke states of
him that he "was always on the fringe of the
extreme nationalist movement, 'though
not apparently a member of the I.R.B." [note: O'Leary. Marcus Bourke. p. 66.]
When the Fenian Rising failed to come off
in 1865 he was extremely disappointed;
and although a bright future seemed in
store in his own land for the young medico
and litterateur he left Ireland and sailed for
the United States in 1866, going, we are
told, because "British rule in Ireland did
not suit his ideas of freedom." [note: Article by Rev. D. O. Crowley in Irish Poets and Novelists. Published San Francisco, 1893.]
He settled in Boston, where 'his career
both as a doctor and a literary man was
crowned with success. Among those who
were to become his ardent admirers and
friends were such Boston literary figures
as ex-Governor Long, John C. Abbott,
Wendell Phillips and Doctor Oliver
Wendell Holmes. [note: Ibid.] In 1868 and 1871,
respectively, Joyce published in Boston two
small volumes of Irish tales in prose,
Legends of the Wars in Ireland and Irish
Fireside Tales; and several others of his
prose stories-all on Irish themes-were
contributed to various magazines. He had
already written a novel, The Squire of
Castle town, which was published in The
Irishman.
A new edition of Ballads, Romances and
Songs, but this time under the title Ballads
of Irish Chivalry, was published by Patrick
Donahue of Boston in l872, but very soon
after it had come from the press, it was
destroyed in the great Boston fire of l872.
A third edition, prepared by P. W. Joyce,
appeared in 1908.
As to the poems that make up Ballads of
Irish Chivalry, I might here quote the
opinion of Doctor George Sigerson (author
of Bards of the Gael and Gall), who wrote
the short unsigned preface for the 1861
edition.
"They were not”, wrote Sigerson, “of
that literary school which seemed as perfect
and as trite as if they were machine-made.
On the contrary they had a certain wild
flower freshness about them which recalled
the rivers, glens and woody mountains, the
romance of love in sylvan glades, revels of
moonlight fairies, feats of daring and
unknown vivid legends of the land we love.
The author evidently had a thorough
knowledge of the old airs sung throughout
the country, for a large number of his
verses were written to those airs and were
songs in reality as well as in name. The
legendary poems, like the others, came
direct from living sources, not from books,
and led to a new fair land of enchantment,
achievement and high endeavour." [note: Irish Book Lover. Feb.-March 1916, p. 131.]
The poems in Ballads of Irish Chivalry
show not only Joyce's deep knowledge of
Irish history in general but also his remarkable
knowledge of the local history
and legends of the South. In particular he
was steeped in the lore of his own Ballahoura
country. Only a man who truly
loved the traditions of the people would
have amassed such a great store of local
knowledge as he possessed. And his
familiarity with every hill and glen and
stream in his native district could only have
come from his having explored them all,
again and again. We know that ever since
his boyhood, one of his great delights lay
in "Walking long distances from early
morning 'till night with his favourite
companions, sketching old castles and
churches, or in the shooting and fishing
parties .... " [note: Article on R. D. Joyce by W. B. Doyle in Limerick Leader, 5,8,1950.] 
Small wonder then if his native district
figures so often in his songs. He introduces
a legend of Ardpatrick in the poem, The
Well of the Omen. First he paints a picture
of olden times when
At morn up green Ard-Patrick the Sunday
bell rang clear,
And downward came the peasants with
looks of merry cheer,
With many a youth and maiden by
pathways green and fair,
To hear the Mass devoutly and say the
Sunday prayer;
And the meadows shone around them while
the skylarks gay were singing,
And the stream sang songs amid the flowers
and the Sunday bell was ringing.
And then he mentions the legend of the
holy well that is situated near the site of the
old Patrician foundation:-
There is a well sunk deeply by old ArdPatrick's wall;
Within it gaze the peasants to see what
may befall:
Who see their shadows down be low, they
will have merry cheer;
Who see not any shadows shall die within
the year.
There staid the youths and maidens where
the soft green grass was springing,
While the stream sang songs amid the
flowers and the Sunday bell was ringing.
Doctor Sigerson, in the quotation already
given, spoke of a large number of Joyce's
compositions being songs in reality as well
as in name. Doctor Sigerson had in mind
such compositions as Along with my Love
I'll go, Roving Brian O'Connell, The Drynan
Dhun, Johnnie Dunlea, Song of Galloping
O' Hogan, Fair Maidens' Beauty will soon fade
away and The Old Love and the New Love-
I sat within the valley green,
I sat me with my true love,
My sad heart strove the two between,
The old love and the new love: The
Old for her, the new that made
Me think on Ireland dearly;
While soft the wind blew down the glade
And shook the golden barley.
'Twas hard the mournful words to frame,
To break the ties that bound us-
, Twas harder still to bear the shame
Of foreign chains around us;
And so I said, "The mountain glen
I'll seek next morning early,
And join the brave United Men":
While soft winds shook the barley.
While sad I kissed away her tears,
My arms around her flinging,
The foeman' s shot burst on our ears,
From out the wild wood ringing.
The bullet pierced my true love's side,
In life's young spring so early,
And there upon my breast she died,
While soft winds shook the barley.
I bore her to the wild wood screen;
And many a summer blossom
I placed, with branches soft and green,
Above her gore-stained bosom:
I wept and kissed her pale pale cheek,
Then rushed o'er vale and far lea,
My vengeance on the foe to wreak,
While soft winds shook the barley.
And blood for blood, without remorse,
I've tak'n at Oulart Hollow,
While mourners placed my true love's corse
Where I full soon will follow;
Around her grave I wander drear,
Noon, night and morning early,
With breaking heart whene'er I hear
The wind that shakes the barley.
Joyce's fine dramatic piece, The
Blacksmith of Limerick, has long been a
favourite recitation. It tells the story of the
blacksmith who, when the Williamites
attempted to storm Limerick city in August,
1690, left Sarsfield's horse unshod, for there
was more urgent work to do-
The blacksmith raised his hammer and
rushed into the street,
His 'prentice boys behind him, the ruthless
foe to meet:
High on the breach of Limerick with
dauntless hearts they stood,
Where bombshells burst and shot fell thick
and redly ran the blood.
There is a great variety of themes in
Ballads of Irish Chivalry. Eoghan Rua
Ó Neill, Sarsfield, O'Sullivan Beare,
Gearóid Iarla, Finneen O'Driscoll, Spenser,
the Norman de Courcy figure in them, as
do legendary figures like An Gadaí Dubh
Ó Dubhain (the Black Robber O'Dwan)
and the White Lady of Bruff. The songs
celebrate battles and romances. One of
them, describing the siege of Cragnouror
Carriganoura-Castle near Mitchelstown,
by the Cromwellians, or Puritans,
(whom Joyce calls "Crop-ears") has an
unusual refrain :-
One morn, at the sack of Cragnour,
A cock and a sparrow were speaking,
While beneath where they sat on the tower
The Crop-ears their fury were wreaking – 
Were wreaking in blood, fire and smoke"
Ah! the castle is gone, bone and marrow,
And my poor Irish heart it is broke",
Said the brave jolly cock to the sparrow.
"For the Crop-ears will have us full soon,
And our bed will be no bed of roses;
They will starve us right dead to the tune
Of a psalm that they'll twang through
their noses;
Never more shall I crow in the hall,
For the gloom there my bosom would
Harrow – 
May the fiend whip them off, psalms and
all,"
Said the brave jolly cock to the sparrow.
"No mare", said the sparrow, "we'll see
Irish gallants come in late and early;
No more shall they hunt o'er the lea,
Where the sweet autumn wind shakes
the barley;
Never more shall they dance on the bawn,
Or ride from the gate like an arrow!"
"Ah! no more shall I wake them at dawn",
Said the brave jolly cock to the sparrow.
But the chief of Cragnour soon returned,
And the Crop-ears right sorely he
hammered;
Then the sparrow with gleefulness burned,
And" Hurra for my Irish!" he
clamoured;-
And "Hurra for the chief of Cragnour !
There is joy through my flesh, bone and
marrow;
For his victory I’ll crow hour by hour",
Said the brave jolly cock to the sparrow.
As was the case with his brother, P. W.,
Robert Dwyer Joyce's thoughts always
returned to his native locality, to Seefin
and Ardpatrick and Glenanaar and the tiny
Grena stream that flows through Lyre-na-Grena -
I wish I sat by Grena's side,
With the friends of boyhood-tide,
With the maids the brilliant-eyed,
Playful, wild and airy,
Who taught me that love could go
From maid to maiden to and fro,
But turning with fonder glow
Back to you, my Mary.
I wish I sat by Grena's stream,
In the ruddy sunset beam,
Where the wavelets leap and gleam
On through dell and wildwood;
Ne'er half so fleet and free
As the fairy feet of glee
That danced 'neath the summer tree
In our dreamy childhood.
I wish I sat by Grena's wave,
Hopes fulfilled that boyhood gave,
Where the woods clothe gorge and cave,
Storied hill and plain, love;
You placed beside me there,
Laughing, loving, kind and fair,
Long parted far but ne'er,
Ne'er to part again, love!
And speaking of Joyce's songs, not many
people know that he was the author of The
Boys of Wexford. He based this song on an
old Wexford ballad which he had frequently
heard sung in his own home in
Glenosheen.
In Boston, a city then enjoying a reputation
for literary activity, Doctor Oliver
Wendell Holmes, author of The Autocrat at
the Breakfast Table, The Poet at the Breakfast
Table, Over the Teacups, etc. was in the
habit of inviting his literary friends to dine
with him, and Joyce was one of those who
used frequently sit at the doctor's hospitable
board, equally enjoying the conversation
and the food. Joyce himself was a fine
conversationalist and raconteur; and, as well,
was a man of commanding appearance.
His energy seemed boundless. In 1876
his epic poem Deirdre was published. Based
on the ancient tragic story of the Ulster
princess Deirdre and the Sons of Usna, the
poem sold over 10,000 copies inside a few
days, much to the delight of Joyce's many
friends. A good example of the poetic
style he cultivated in his retelling of the old
tragedy is found in the warning uttered
by the seer, Caffa, when he hears of the
birth of Deirdre:-
For thou, all beautiful, shalt wake the fire
Of jealous anger and insane desire
In many a hero's heart; and war's red field
Shall gleam with levelled lance and brazen
shield
And thirsty sword, where hostile banners rise
Of Kings renowned, to win thy smiles and
sighs:
Alas! for in thy day and all for thee,
Great Usna's sons shall die by treachery
And the King's wrath; and from that deed
of shame
Fair Eman's halls shall feed the ravening
flame
Of war and carnage, kindled by the light
Of thy destroying glances, 'till the night
Of woe enwrap the land accurst of men,
O Deirdre, evil fate beyond our ken!
In 1879 he published another epic poem,
Blanid, this too based on one of the old
tales of high tragedy from the Ruraíocht or
Red Branch cycle. Incidentally, a short
poem that he wrote on the fly-leaf of a
copy of Blanid which he was presenting to
a friend reveals something of the thoughts
and feelings of the author himself:
I had two lives, one full of all unrest,
One full of heavenly joys of heart and brain.
In one I walk around in grief and pain
And hear the deep sighs of the saddened
breast,
And groanings of the stricken ones and see
The sad pale face of death and misery
The poor man's load of grief, the rich man's
frown,
And I feel leer of sin, 'till I am sad;
In one I wander thro' a magic town,
Paven with pearls and in bright garlands
clad
From those bright meads of Asphodel that
crown
The glorious hill of Poesy-the glad,
The green delightful hill, whose cliffs of
gold
Each day with eyes of rapture I behold. [note: Ibid.]
Joyce was very sensitive to the sufferings
of others, whether those others were at
home in Ireland, under foreign rule, or in
the teeming back streets or slums of Boston.
Ireland was ever uppermost in his thoughts,
and it grieved him constantly that she
should be unfree and that he should be in
exile from her. Father Crowley sees in the
following lines from Joyce's The Despair of
Cuhallin an outward expression of the grief
and mental agony that eventually "shook
his well-knit frame."
No kindly counsel of a friend
With soothing balm the heart can mend;
I walk alone in grief and make
My bitter moan for her dear sake,
For loss of love is man's worst woe,
And I am suffering and I know.
Earth, air and sun and moon and star,
Of man's strange soul but mirrors are,
Bright when the soul is bright and dark
As now, without one saving spark,
While the black tides of sorrow flow;
And I am suffering and I know.
To my sad eyes that sorrow dims
The greenest grass the swallow skims,
The flowers that once were fair to me,
The meadows and the blooming tree
Dark as funeral garments grow;
And I am suffering and I know. [note: Father Crowley's article in Irish Poets and Novelists. See 26 above.]
Joyce became very closely associated with
the Fenian movement in the United States.
When leaving Ireland for America he had
taken with him a sword which had belonged
to one of his mother's family. This
particular O'Dwyer had gone to France
with the Wild Geese after the signing of
the Treaty of Limerick in 1691. He joined
the French army and fought in the War of
the Spanish Succession, and was killed in
1707 at the battle of Almansa, where the
English were defeated by the Duke of
Berwick. O'Dwyer's sword was brought
back to Ireland, presumably by a comrade,
and was given to his family, and passed
eventually to Elizabeth O'Dwyer, mother
of P. W. and Robert Dwyer Joyce. The
latter had inscribed on it the words,
Buille ar son Eireann-a blow for Ireland.
And that is what Robert Dwyer Joyce
hoped himself to strike some day-a blow
for Ireland.
He was far from Ireland however when
the Fenians struck their blow for Ireland in
March, 1867. The last fight of the Fenian
Rising took place on 31 March, 1867, at
Kilclooney Wood, a few short miles south
of Joyce's native Glenosheen. That was the
fight in which the chivalrous Fenian leader,
Peter O'Neill Crowley, lost his life. When
news of Kilclooney reached Joyce he wrote
a long poem in memory of Crowley, and
of the fight that he and his comrades had
made. The patriotic spirit of the author is
well revealed in this stirring poem:-
God bless you, Peter Crowley,
For the holy work you wrought;
God rest your soul in heaven’s bright bowers
For the lesson you have taught-
Fair Freedom ‘till the end of time
Shall fondly point to it;
That lesson in your heart's best blood
For trampled nations writ-
That in their struggles to be free
And gain their rights again,
One true man, dead for liberty,
Is worth ten living men!
The beacon fires enkindled
By Emmet and by Tone,
Bright have they glowed on Freedom’s road
To lead our footsteps on-
O Martyr! on that dangerous way
A flame gleams now from thine
As high and clear but still more near
To Freedom's holy shrine,
Where graved above the gate we see
By Freedom's trenchant pen,
"One true man, dead for liberty,
Is worth ten living men.”
‘Twas down in wild Kilclooney,
At the dawning of the day,
The redcoats circled round the wood,
To catch their gallant prey.
Young Kelly and the stout Mac Clure
And Crowley, brave and bold
He slept as sleeps the lion king
In his rocky mountain hold –
Perchance he dreamt that vision free
Within his woody den-
One true man, dead for liberty,
Is worth ten living men.
Hark! 'Twas the foeman's summons
That on their slumbers broke,
And answering quick that hostile call
The outlaws' rifles spoke.
The captured Kelly and Mac Clure
Saw fearless Crowley stand,
With a bullet wound on his forehead fair,
And a broken trigger hand.
And they heard him shout full lustily
Adown the wooded glen,
"One true man, dead for liberty,
Is worth ten living men!"
A brave dash at the foeman,
And through their frightened ranks,
And down the shaggy mountain side
To Ounageeragh's banks-
With pistol in his good left hand,
And the red blood on his right;
There turned he with a dauntless heart
To fight his last brave fight.
And well he knew, that soldier free,
That Fenian hero then,
One true man, dead for liberty,
Is worth ten living men .
A volley from the redcoats,
From him one pistol ball,
That brought a foeman to the earth,
And then 'twas silent all.
He tottered for a moment's space,
Then fell into the tide
That round the hero foamed and whirled
With his heart's blood crimsoned wide
"God's mercy on my soul!" cried he,
And gasped he forth again,
"One true man, dead for liberty,
Is worth ten living men!"
To the town upon the Funcheon [note: The town on the Funcheon is Mitchelstown.]
The hero's corse they bore,
And never such a sight was seen
By Puncheon's winding shore.
The women gathered all around
To join his sister's wail.
And the men with stern eyes sadly bent
On the Martyr's corse so pale.
They felt that lesson of the free,
Their proud hearts warming then,
One true man, dead for liberty,
Is worth ten living men!
From the town upon the Puncheon
On stout shoulders went his bier,
With laurels decked and the fairest flowers
Of the springtime of the year;
Unto the ancient churchyard,
Where lay his sires full low,
The mighty concourse wound along
With mournful pace and slow-
His country's tyrants shook to see
The lesson taught them then,
One true man, dead for liberty,
Is worth ten living men.
In the red grave lies our Martyr
With his glorious laurel crown,
In the pride of youth and manliness
And unforgot renown-
And could you see the looks I saw
Around his clay-cold bed,
With swelling breast you'd proudly say,
"Old Ireland is not dead!"
With clenched hands you'd cry with me
In voice of thunder then-
" One true man, dead for liberty,
Is worth ten living men!"
We'll build him up a monument
With Emmet, Sheares and Tone,
And with all our country's martyrs,
When Ireland is our own.
We'll build it on some old green hill,
Where the Irish winds shall blow
Their histories round admiring earth
To the nations in their woe;
And with our swords the legend free
We'll carve upon it then-
" One true man, dead for liberty,
Is worth ten living men!"
Joyce was a close and trusted friend of
such Fenian leaders as O'Donovan Rossa,
John Devoy and James J. O'Kelly, and his
name figures fairly frequently in the
correspondence edited by Desmond Ryan
and William O'Brien in Devoy's Post Bag. [note: Cathal O'Shannon's article on Joyce brothers in Evening Press. See 20 above.]
When John Boyle O'Reilly reached
America after his escape from the convict
colony in Australia, Joyce was one of the
small group who succeeded in getting him
a post on the influential paper, The Boston
Pilot. [note: Ibid.] And later he and O'Reilly were on
the committee of Boston Fenians who
welcomed Devoy and other released
Fenians on their arrival in that city in l871.
O'Reilly, with characteristic modesty, described
the committee as being composed
of "the eight first Irishmen in Boston and
myself.''
In 1871 Joyce and O'Reilly were among
the Fenians who supported Devoy when
the latter intimated his willingness to back
the "New Departure", the name given to
the alliance forged between the American
Clan na Gael (the ungrammatical name of
this militant organisation arose through
somebody, not too familiar with Irish,
writing the name intended, Clanna Gael,
as Clan na Gael) on the one hand and
Parnell, Davitt and the Land Leaguers on
the other. A year later Joyce was a member
of the committee appointed to ensure the
success of Parnell's American visit. [note: Ibid.]
But although he gave his blessing to the
"New Departure" Joyce believed that
Irish freedom would not be won without a
fight, and he continued to busy himself
planning new methods of casting guns and
improving the Fenian gunpowder factories,
with a view to militant action in Ireland.[note: Feature "Window on the Past" Irish Press, 24,10,1962.]
He was not without some military
training himself, for he held the rank of
colonel in the army of the United States,
and he numbered among his acquaintances
many of the officers of the Maryland and
Massachussets' regiments. We are told that
the walls of several rooms of his residence
were covered with maps of battlefields in
Europe and the United States. [note: W. B. Doyle's article in Limerick Leader. See 29 above.] And he
knew, and he was glad of it, that
"The old hope still lingered in Erin
Of a fight for her mountains and plains".
Boston, when Doctor Joyce settled there,
was fast becoming, socially and politically,
a city of fashion, wealth and influence.
With the close of the Civil War many of
the most prominent men in New England
took up residence there. It quickly became,
we are told, "the hub of the universe"; its
population rising from 250,256 in 1870 to
448,477 in 1890. By the latter year the Irish
population in the city was 30,000. The
young Irish physician found conditions
favourable for a successful career. [note: Ibid.]
Doctor Joyce was not only admitted to,
but was courted by, the best society. But it
to was the working classes of the Irish population
that his heart really went out. He
understood them intimately, and was
friend as well as physician to them; and
they, in their turn revered him. He allowed
no barrier of professional formality to
intrude itself into his relationship with
them; he spoke to them as man to man,
and his sincerity and his cheerful words
and manner were often the only remedy
required to cure the pangs and aches of
some "poor exile of Erin."
It often happened that when he called to
see some poor or needy patient he discovered
that what really was needed was
not medicine so much as food; and in such
cases he invariably went to the nearest
store and paid for food to be sent to the
patient. [note: Ibid.]
The man who feels much suffers much.
And it was so in a marked degree with
Robert Dwyer Joyce. His great sympathy
with those who sorrowed or were ill; and
his deep involvement in the cause of Irish
freedom would ultimately tax his strength
beyond the breaking point. He found his
only real relaxation in his writing. Having
already written two long epic poems on
Irish mythological themes he now planned
a third such poem, The Courtship of Etain.
but this was never completed. After seventeen
strenuous years in Boston his health
began to fail and he decided to return to
Ireland.
Father Crowley (author of Irish Poets and
Novelists) and a mutual friend visited him
in his rooms in Chambers Street, Boston,
about a month before his departure for
Ireland. Though but a shadow of his
former self, Father Crowley tells us that he
yet seemed vigorous and talked eloquently
all the time. After some remarks about his
imminent return to Ireland he changed the
conversation to Irish history and literature.
His ruling passion was still strong. Father
Crowley's friend remarked:
"Come what may, Doctor, you have left
your impress on the literature of your
native land and established a lasting fame."
"Fame, I suppose," remarked Father
Crowley, "affords very poor consolation to
a man when about to close his eyes to
earthly things.''
"On that point," said Doctor Joyce, "I
do not agree with you. I think it affords one
great consolation. It is a great deal to leave
behind a name that is likely to be cherished
in the hearts of a grateful people. I do not
however," he continued, "draw all my
consolation from that source. The priest
was with me yesterday and I am prepared
for any kind of journey now. If the worst
comes I am not without hope of a happy
resurrection. ''[note: Father Crowley's article in Irish Poets and Novelists. See 26 above.]
Robert Dwyer Joyce left Boston in
September, 1883. A Boston journal,
wishing him hon voyage) said:
"Dr. Joyce returns to the land of his
birth after an unbroken absence of twenty
years, during which time he has achieved
distinction here in medicine as well as in
literature. He at once attracted attention by
his professional ability and fidelity and
obtained a large practice. His kindly nature
led him to give a goodly number of young
medical students the benefit of his advice
and encouragement and he presided over
classes of physicians who derived great
benefit from his practical instruction. He
was also a lecturer in Harvard Medical
School." [note: W. B. Doyle's article in Limerick Leader. See 29 above.]
And before long an Irish journal had this
to say of him, in the course of an obituary:-
"He was greatly beloved in Boston
which he left with the good wishes of rich
and poor alike; and on the day of his
departure a large party of the chief citizens
escorted him on board the Cunard steamship
Marathon to give him a loving
good-bye. He will long be remembered by
the poor Irish population of Boston, for he
was as ready with his dollars to relieve
their necessities as he was with his medical
skill to alleviate their ailments !"[note: Irish Times report of funeral of R. D. Joyce 27,10,1883.]
Robert Dwyer Joyce died in the home
of his brother P. W. Joyce, in Dublin, on
24 October, 1883. He had received the
Last Sacraments from an old friend of his,
Father C. P. Meehan, author of The Fate
and Fortunes of the Earls of Tyrone and
Tyrconnell. He was buried in Glasnevin.
In the course of a lecture on Joyce and
his poetry, delivered on 10 January, 1916,
Doctor George Sigerson, President of the
National Literary Society-the same who
had written the preface for Joyce's first
collection of poems fifty-five years
earlier-recalling that Joyce was a Munster
man, said:-
"Munster had, indeed, been a wonderland
of chivalry because of its great
Norman-Irish feudatories, whose tragic
Other sources are acknowledged in body of the article.
The extract from the 1821 census return is from a manuscript copy of certain entries for the Kilfinane-Ardpatrick district
made by the late Padraig Ó Ruairc, formerly of Ardpatrick and Dublin, before the destruction of the originals in the Four
Courts in 1922.
fortunes were like red rubies in history, as
their ruined castles stand out like wrecks on
earth. But none could understand the
country; none could feel with that vivid
intensity which its picturesque life demanded,
save one who had a poet's
imagination, a complete knowledge of its
written records and a thorough, minute
and familiar friendship with unwritten
popular life, its sentiments and traditions.
Such a man was he. There was but one
other quality required-that he should have
a high love of honour, the true spirit of
chivalry. That, too, he possessed. Joyce was
a knight of the old times when knighthood
was in flower. He was an open-air poet;
traces of his knowledge and love of nature
are in almost every poem. Trees, bushes,
berries, wild plants of all kinds, are familiar
to him, as are the ways of sea gulls and
ravens, wild deer and wolves ... in 1883 he
came 'to die at home at last.' It might be
said that his spirit outwore the scabbard,
but what an honour for the scabbard to
have sheathed and preserved unsullied so
pure, so bright and so chivalrous a spirit."[note: Irish Book Lover. Feb.-March 1916. p. 131.]
The memory of the Joyce brothers of
Glenosheen deserves to be kept alive. Each,
in his own way, did good work for Ireland
at a time when such work was sorely needed.
Gabhaim buiochas leo
I would like to express my very special thanks to Doctor Robert Dwyer-Joyce, of Histon, Nr. Cambridge, England, for
supplying me with a copy of Michael Joyce's pedigree of the Joyce family, as well as other notes relative to the family.
And I would like to thank Mr. Walter MacGrath, Cork, for letting me have the words of R. D. Joyce's poem on O'Neill
Crowley; also Miss Patricia MacMahon, Limerick, and Mr. Mairtin MacCaba, Co. Librarian, Monaghan, for their valuable
assistance.
