By happy chance as music-lovers
among us prepare to commemorate
the third centenary of the birth of
Turlogh O'Carolan, prince of Irish harpers
and composers, the harp itself is rapidly
regaining its popularity here. One of the
most interesting developments in Irish
music in recent years has been the revival of
interest in the emit, the small harp held on
the knee, and the clairseach, the larger and
better known form, which has been the
symbol of our State since 1926.
The Brian Boru Harp
There are copious references to the harp
in pre-Christian Ireland, and it received
mention in that meticulous legal code, the
Brehon Laws. Legends grew up in great
number about its origin. One of them
concerns a runaway wife, who was hotly
pursued by her chieftain husband. He found
her asleep on the sea-shore, smiling most
sweetly to herself. Nearby lay the skeleton
of a whale, and the wind blowing through
the stretched sinews of that large frame
made sweet and soothing sounds. The
observant chief noted how pleasantly his
wife reacted to this suantrai. He brought her
back to his dún, and to ensure her company
henceforth, caused an instrument to be
made resembling the harmonious whalebones.
The conjectures of archaeologists and
music historians concerning the origins of
the Irish harp seem to verify the accounts
of the coming of the Milesians. The Irish
harp is a descendant of the Egyptian harp,
which came to us via Scythia. From stone
carvings we can deduce that the earliest
Egyptian harps were derived from the
bent bow, with strings added in diminishing
lengths to give varying tones. The more
advanced and sophisticated forms can be
seen in the frescoes of Thebes. These were
about six feet high and of beautiful workmanship.
They had tuning pegs, sound
holes, and strings of gut.
The most striking characteristic of the
Egyptian harp, and one which affords a clue
to the origin of the Irish harp, is the
absence of a fore-pillar or harmonic curved
bar. A sculpture of a harp of this kind can
still be found in the panel of an old cross at
Ullard, Co. Kilkenny. Commenting on
this, the music historian, W. H. Grattan
Flood, wrote in his authoritative work on
the harp: "Petrie dates the Ullard harp
(which I myself examined in 1888) as of the
ninth century, and was of opinion that the
Irish harp was a form of the cithara, derived
from an Egyptian source, thus corroborating
the bardic tradition of the Milesians,
as, according to the Irish annalists, 'the
Milesians in their expedition from. Spain to
Ireland were accompanied by a harper'."
Later, some unknown genius with a rare
combination of musical and mathematical
skill supplied the fore-pillar and made an
oblique triangle of the harp so as to ensure
the true proportion of the strings.
The very first reference to the harp in
our literature seems to be that in the vision
of Caithir Mor (A.D. 100). In the Dinn
Seanchas, edited by Amergin MacAmalgaid
circa A.D. 540, we are told that in ancient
times: "The people deemed each other's
voices sweeter than the warblings of a
melodious harp; such peace and concord
reigned among them, that no music could
delight them more than the sound of each
other's voices."
The harp was involved in the history of
northern and southern Ireland at a very
early date. Apparently the function of
"bard" had become rather blurred, so that
it was not quite clear whether he was poet
or musician. The Saltair of Cashel,
composed about A.D. 900, describes how
it was decided to make the south specialize
in music and the north in poetry :
The two renowned sons of Milesius
Who conquered both Erin and Alban,
With them hither there came
A comely poet and a gifted harper.
Cir, the son of Cis, was the fair haired poet,
The harper's name was Ona, the fair-haired.
For the sons of the renowned Milesino
Was the harper wont to tune his harp
For the chiefs, who, by battles many and
fierce,
Had conquered the sovereignty of Erin.
Their sweet and well-timed notes they raised
For Ebor and for Eremon.
They in a friendly way cast lots
For these professors of the sweet arts,
Until to the southern chieftain fell
The accomplished and most dexterous harper;
Sweetness of stringed music, comeliness of
Belong to the Southern parts of Erin.
Thus shall it be to the end of time
With the noble race of valiant Ebor.
To the lot of the northern chieftain fell
The poet with all his varied gifts;
race,
And so, without contest, to the north belongs
The palm of poetry, and the chief of poets.
It was evidently easier to establish
harmonious relations between north and
south a thousand years ago!
There was another variant of the cruit
The harper and harp on the cross beam of Ullard Cross, Co. Kilkenny.
and clairseach-the small eight-stringed
harp, ocht-teadach-which was much used
by clerics, very appropriately, in their
recitation of the psalms. It is recorded in the
Book of Lecan that "on a certain day when
King Felim was in Cashel, the abbot of a
church came to him, who took his little
eight-stringed harp from his girdle and
played sweet music and sang a poem to it."
This ocht-teadach was attached to the girdle
of the clerics, and the custom seems to have
prevailed for many centuries, since Giraldus
Cambrensis mentions that bishops and
abbots travelled about with harps. It is
possible that the figures we find in the
panels of some of the old high crosses
holding small harps may be those of
clerics.
Not clerics alone, but the vast number
of the people of Ireland seem to have been
able to play the harp. Grattan Flood cites
the ancient Egyptian historian Heccataeus,
who, in the course of a description of
Ireland about 500 B.C., wrote: "They say
that Latona was born here, and, therefore,
that they worshipped Apollo above all
other gods .. . That there is a city likewise
consecrated to this god, whose citizens are
most of them harpers, who, playing on the
harp, chant sacred hymns to Apollo in the
temple." There had always been a natural
love of music in the Irish from most
ancient times. The following story tells how
the Irish children imagined the spirit of
song dwelt within the trembling strings of
the cruit itself:
The spouse of Thrathal had remained in her
house;
Two children rose with their fair locks about
her knees;
They bend their ears above the harp,
As she touched with her white hand
The trembling strings. She stops,
They take the harp themselves!
But cannot find the sound which they admired.
'Why,' they said, 'does it not answer us?
Show us the string wherein the song dwells.'
She bade them search for it till she returns;
Their little fingers wander among the wires.
This was composed about the year
200 B.C. Certain it is that it was the
practice at festivals in ancient times to pass
the harp around, and the man or woman
who could not perform on it skilfully was
considered to be in disgrace.
We are all familiar with Moore's
"Melodies", most of which are adaptations
of O'Carolan's airs, and his frequent
reference to the harp. The two most famous
are The Minstrel Boy and The Harp That
Once Through Tara's Halls. Harpers
accompanied warriors into battle to enthuse
and inspire them. Hence the reference to
"the ranks of death" or the vanguard.
Courage was also theirs. Great Feiseanna
were held several times a year in which
more than a thousand bards competed. The
biggest of these was the Feis at Tara at
which besides much administrative business
musical contests were conducted. The last
one there was held in the year 560, under
the Ard Rí, Dermot Mac Fergus, founder
of Clonmacnoise. In that same year it was
cursed by Saint Ruadhan of Lorrha, and
thereafter no Feiseanna were held, and the
harp hung mute on Tara's walls.
Even from the first settlement of the
Milesians the bard was held in high esteem.
To earn that respect he had to do more
than play the harp and compose poems.
He also filled the parts of judge, legislator
and historian. In the reign of King
Tigernmass he stood on a par with royalty
in dignity, and took precedence over all
other nobility, civil and military. Class
distinction was indicated by regulations
concerning the colours of people's dress.
The proletariat and soldiers were limited to
one colour; private gentlemen and military
officers might wear two; battalion commanders,
three; betaghs, the proprietors of
houses of hospitality could wear four; the
chief nobility and knights had five;
ollamhs or top ranking bards had six, while
the king alone was entitled to seven. (It is
not recorded how the ladies circumvented
this regulation, as they surely did!) There
were many orders of bards, and chief
among them was the Druid. In our time,
as Oscar Wilde observed, speaking from an
amount of experience of the subject, poets
are born and not paid, while Canon
Sheehan declared that to say a person is a
saint or poet is to hint at some hidden
imbecility and ineptitude. But it was
otherwise in ancient Ireland, where those
who busied themselves with the things of
the spirit, and above all the music-makers,
were held in high esteem. It was taken, as
by the Chinese, as a test and testimony of
high culture.
The bard, complete with harp, stood next
the king literally and metaphorically. On
festive occasions he could sway the
monarch's moods as subtly as the bard in
Dryden's lengthy verse, Alexander's Feast,
or, the Power of Music. A few lines break
surface from our schooldays-
"Soothed with the sound the king grew vain;
Fought all his battles o'er again,
And thrice he routed all his foes, and thrice he
slew the slain."
Saint Patrick, as we know, had exquisite
tact, and while he slowly rid Ireland of all
Figure with harp on guard stone of
Carndonagh Cross, Co. Donegal.
that was false in pagan cults, was careful to
preserve and perfect to the glory of God all
that was beautiful and fair. If some of the
professional bards opposed him, it was
because they feared for the modus vivendi,
and that their occupation would be gone.
The great-hearted apostle convinced most
of them that, like his Master, he came, not
to destroy but to fulfil and his clerics
carried their cruits or ocht-teadachs in their
girdles, as did the Irish missionaries when
they fanned out through Europe to reenkindle
the light of sanctity and learning
after the collapse of the Roman civilization.
Saint Colmcille was a file of the first
rank, and we recall his memorable intervention
at the momentous Mórdhail of
Drumceat in 575 to save the race of bards
from the banishment which impended
because of their inordinate demands and
privileges. The literary remains of the
great Columbanus include a carmen navale
or boat song in eight stanzas of three
hexameters each, and we can well imagine
as they rowed out from Bangor towards
Gaul, the strong-armed monks chanted this
shanty accompanied by some harpist near
the helmsman. We can well believe, too,
that when they were building those great
monasteries of Bobbio, Luxeuil, Jumieges,
Faremoutiers, Jouarre, Annegray, Fontaines
and others, they relaxed awhile after
evening Vespers to play the harp and sing
together those songs of exile for which the
race of peregrini would always be famed.
Nearer home, the Anglo-Saxons gladly
accepted and cultivated the Irish cruit. "The
Celts," wrote Abbot Cabrol, "handed on
to the Saxons, along with the Faith, the
torch of learning," and, we might add, the
gift of the harp, or hearpe as they began to
call it. The Venerable Bede, saint and
historian, mentions the popularity of the
harp in his time, (seventh-eighth century),
and the old legend of King Alfred the
Great (871-901) eluding his enemies
disguised as a harper on the island of
Athelney indicates that the harp had
already become established in Britain by
the tenth century.
Giraldus Cambrensis, as we have said,
was lavish in his praise of our harps and
harpers, albeit our language struck his
musical ears "like unto the howling of
dogs." As the secretary of Henry II and
Bishop of Saint David's, he had more
opportunity than most to examine and note
what he saw, and seems to have attained
some musical training himself, judging
from his minute observation on the performance
of our harpers: "It is astonishing
that in such a complex and rapid movement
of the fingers, the musical proportions, as
to rhythm, can be preserved, and that,
throughout the difficult modulations on
their various instruments, the harmony - notwithstanding
the shakes and slurs, and
variously intertwined organisings-is
completely observed." He described "the
striking together of the chords of the
diatesseron (the fourth degree of the scale)
and the diapente (the fifth) introducing
B flat," and " the tinkling of the small
strings coalescing charmingly with the deep
notes of the bass." Mindful of the old
Roman standard that ars est celare Artem - the
excellence of art lies in concealing it - he
praised the Irish harpers for the skill
wherewith they concealed their skill.
When the Normans, those "small, bullet-headed
men," had been duly absorbed into
the Irish race so as to merit the old tag
about being more Irish than the Irish, it
was deemed necessary to enact the Statute
of Kilkenny in 1367 to prevent further
fraternizing. Among other things it was
made punishable to receive or entertain
Irish harpers or minstrels within the Pale.
Irish bards then, as now, were wont to
wear their hair long in a fashion called the
coulin, and it so happened that Englishmen,
wearing the same hair style, were slain by
their compatriots before they had time to
explain. An old and lengthy ballad tells of
one:
" For beauty and bravery Cathan was known
And the long flowing Coulin he wore in
Tyrone;
The sweetest of singers and harpers was he,
All over the North, from the Bann to the
sea."
The burden of the song was that he lost his
head, his coulin, his cailin and his harp all
in one fell swoop at the hands of "the
lords of the castle."
In spite of enactments, the Irishized
Normans continued not only to entertain
harpers and minstrels, but to be entertained
by them. Most of the noble houses had, in
their retinue, a harper, who received a
rigorous training, thus carrying on a very
ancient Irish tradition. Freed from mundane
cares and the threat of poverty which so
faithfully shadows all artists, these harpers
were at liberty to compose music for their
instrument. Modern scholarship has
brought many of these compositions to
light. Still loveliest among all is Eibhlín a
Run, composed by the harper, Carol
O'Daly, "chief composer of Ireland, and
ollav in music of the country of
Corcomroe" (Co. Clare), in 1386.
Carol O'Daly was of ancient Gaelic
stock, brother to Donogh More O'Daly,
Lord Abbot of Boyle, and known as the
Ovid of Ireland because of his skill in Latin
verse. Carol fell in love with Eileen, the
daughter of a chief named Kavanagh.
Carol's sentiments were reciprocated by the
fair maiden, but her family and friends
objected to a harpist's status. So great was
their disapproval that they hounded O'Daly
into leaving the country.
In his absence they told Eileen that he
had married another maiden in foreign
parts, and induced her to become engaged
to a likely lord with more money than
music. O'Daly arrived home the day before
the wedding, and, disguised as a harper,
made his way into the Kavanagh home
where fun and feasting were in progress.
Eibhlin called on the harper to strike up a
tune, and, gladly availing himself of the
opportunity to make himself known to his
beloved and to her alone, he sang the
beautiful air, composing it while he
watched her face for a flash of recognition:
Le grádh dhuit níl radharc am’ cheann Eibhlín a Rúin
Is trácht is saidhbhreas luím Eibhlín a Eúin
Ómo mhórdháil ro ghreidhnmhar thu
Solas na soillse’s tú
Ó mo lile thú, mo mheidhir is tú
Mo bhruinneal thú go deimhin
‘Smo chlúr dá bhfuil sa choill seo thú
A’s am’ chroí istigh níl leigheas gan tú
Agus rún mo chroí agus mo chléibh is tú Eibhlín a Rúin.
The flash of recognition duly came, and
Eileen and the harper hastened away from
Polmonty Castle to live happily together.
The lovely air is so often passed off as
Scottish, with the title Robin Adair that we
may pause to examine the evidence here,
as afforded by Mr. Shannon Millin,
Barrister. In the course of correspondence
between Thompson, the publisher, and
Robert Burns, the Scottish poet, is found
the following letter, dated August, 1793.
It is from the publisher to the poet:
"I shall be glad to see you give Robin
Adair a Scottish dress. Peter is furnishing
him with an English suit for a change, and
you are well matched together. Robin's air
is excellent, though he has an out-of-the-way
measure as ever poor Parnassian wight
was plagued with."
Burns replied in the same month : "I
have tried my hand on Robin Adair, and
you will probably think with little success;
but it is such a cursed, cramp, out-of-the-way
measure that I despair of doing anything
better to it. So much for namby
pamby. I may after all try my hand on it in
Scot's verse. There I always find myself
most at ho1ne." There is further circumstantial
evidence. The original air was
written to suit the triad form of verse - three
lines set in special rhythm. Burns was
never known to experiment in this meter
before receiving Thompson's letter. The
harpists of Ireland had been chanting
Eibhlín a Ruin for four centuries before it
reached the Scottish bard. It is thought that
the original minstrel of the name Robin
Adair hailed from. County Wicklow and
emigrated to Scotland where he sang the
air to such appreciative audiences that his
name was fastened to it. Burns, it will be
recalled, strained his libretto to suit the tune
by putting the words of a melancholy
maiden who laments her lover's absence in
the melody he used sing.
That the Statute of Kilkenny and similar
bans on bards continued to be ignored is
evident from entries in the Annals of Ulster
which record the death of the harper
Florence O'Corcoran in 1496 and William
McGilroy in 1497. A contemporary states
that every big house had two harps, kept
in readiness for skilled travellers who
should be able to play them as became a
gentleman. Even in the reign of the Tudors
(1485- 1603) Irish harpers moved with
comparative freedom outside the Pale.
Grattan Flood notes that "during the
year 1601 ten Irish harpers were pardoned,
as was also a famous harp-maker, Tadhg
O'Dermody, whose son, Donal, was the
maker of the still-preserved "Dalway"
harp. In the following year nine harpers
were received into favour, as appears from
the fiants of 1601 and 1602. Two notable
harpers, who were also composers - John
and Harry Scott-flourished at this date,
of whom Bunting makes mention. Yet this
was the time of the fateful and tragic
Battle of Kinsale that marked the break up
of our ancient Gaelic nation. Ten years
later one Captain Barnaby Rich noted the
respect in which the harper was held by
the Irish, and that "every great man in
the country hath his rhymer and harper."
The great Rory Dall O'Cahan flourished
during the reign of King James I, of England
(1603-1625) and spent most of his time in
Scotland. He composed the beautiful
melody, Tabhair dom do lamh, to celebrate
King James's reconciliation with Lady
Eglinton. He also composed the air, An
bacach buidhe, and he is introduced into
Walter Scott's Legend of Montrose. There is
reference to a harper named Tadhg O'Coffy
also, who served the great Gaelic scholar,
Geoffrey Keating, and to whom the
scholar-priest addressed a poem. About the
Kildare stone harpist in the cross beam
of the North Cross, Castledermot.
same period we find a blind harper,
William Fitzgerald Barry-in the service of
Lord Barrymore, and a Daniel O'Cahill
employed as harper to Viscount Buttevant.
It was likewise in the reign of James I that
the Irish harp was introduced into the third
quarter of the English royal shield, and
began the custom, of representing Ireland
by a harp. Their majesties, acting no doubt
on the expert advice of their counsellors,
apparently considered the symbol apt, even
if it chanced that at the same time they
were doing their best to obliterate our race.
However, the motto around the shield
seems to anticipate criticism, for it reads
honi soit qui mal y pense, which we take to
mean, "the shame be his who thinks evil."
The Irish harp was never more popular
than in the reign of James's successor,
Charles I, as may be deduced from the fact
that in 1630 a book of motets was published
by one Martin Pierson in London,
"remarkable," as Flood comments, "as
being the first printed work in which
tunes were arranged for the Irish harp."
And he further quotes M. Boullaye le
Gouz, writing in 1844, as saying "the Irish
are very fond of the harp, on which nearly
all play, as the English do on the fiddle."
Harpers were able to gain access to places
forbidden the priests and friars on pain of
death or imprisonment, and , as we know
from such old so ngs as Th e Bard of Armagh ,
many a pastor reached his flock disguised,
as did Felim Brady, Archbishop of Armagh.
The simple and care-free words were a
camouflage for the sac red and sorrowful
mission of the " harper", and few Saxon
spies ever guessed that " Kathleen'', was
the same as Mangan's " Rosaleen", Ireland
herself. Here are the words of The Bard of
Armagh.
O list to the lay of a poor Irish harper,
And scorn not the strains of his old
withered hand,
But remember the fingers could once move
sharper
To raise merry strains of his dear native
land.
It was long before the shamrock, our Green
Isle's loved emblem,
Was crushed in its beauty 'neath the Saxon
lion's law,
I was called by the colleens of village and
valley,
Bold Phelim Brady, the Bard of Armagh.
At pattern or fair I could twist my shillelagh,
Or trip to a jig with my brogues bound
with straw,
While all the fair maidens around me
assembled
Loved bold Phelim Brady, the Bard of
Armagh.
Although I have travelled this wide world
over,
Yet, Erin's my home and a parent to me,
Then, O let the ground that my old bones
shall cover
Be cut from the soil that is trod by the free.
And when Sergeant Death in his cold arms
shall embrace me
And lull me to sleep with Sweet Erin go
Breagh,
By the side of my Kathleen, my young wife,
O place me,
Then forget Phelim Brady, the Bard of
Armagh.
The popularity of the harp in Ireland
continued through the Confederate period
(I644-1648), until the Cromwellians descended
as a hideous plague on our nation in
1649. If ever a man was "fit for treasons,
stratagems and spoils," whose "motions of
his spirit were as dull as night and his
affections dark as Erebus," it was the Lord
Protector, Oliver Cromwell. Belloc
observed in his masterly study of him that
the medical profession recognised in him
a sufferer from deep melancholia valde
melancholicus, resulting in a character given
to outbursts of violence, followed by
remorse, with intervening periods of
domesticity and hymn singing. An uncouth
man in origin and nature, he had an
instinctive hatred of all that was gentle,
cultured and refined. Of Cromwell's
atrocities in Ireland we are well aware. But
it is not generally known that he gave his
barbaric troopers instructions to search out
and destroy harps, and it was recorded
that "they broke all the harps they could
find throughout Ireland."
So thorough was this search-and-destroy
policy carried out that it seemed as if the
harp was about to become completely
extinct in Ireland. But, knowing that an
inevitable dawn of liberty would come,
harpers wrote out exact instructions for
those who should come after, describing
minutely how the harp was made and
played.
One of the most interesting codes of
instructions, and an invaluable source of
information to harp-makers ever since, is a
poem written by Pierce Ferriter, of Co.
Kerry, who was executed in Killarney,
1652. He was not only a gallant soldier,
and gifted poet but an accomplished
harpist. His most treasured possession was a
harp given him by Edmond mac an daill, of
Moylurg, Co. Roscommon. He wrote a
lengthy poem on this, describing it in
detail, even to the delicate workmanship of
its decorations. We are told he had another
harp overladen with gold and carved by
Partholan mór MacCathaill, "bound and
emblazoned" by Benglann. We learn from
Ferriter that the sound board was called
com, the cross-tree, corr, and the fore-pillar,
lamhchrann.
When the melancholy monster died in
1658 and the plague of Puritanism had
passed away, Charles II restored mirth and
music to England, and he is connected, as
we shall see, with the Brian Boru harp.
And though dark days, including the period
of the Penal Laws, still loomed ahead for
Ireland, some harps and harpers remained.
The greatest and last of our bards, Turlough
O'Carolan, was born at this time.
O'Carolan, "the last of the bards," was
born at Newtown, Co. Meath, in 1670.
Like most musical prodigies, he gave
evidence of genius from his very childhood.
Through confiscations and poverty his
father was forced to emigrate, and Turlogh
took to the road with his harp, a veritable
wandering minstrel. He was afflicted by
smallpox at eighteen years of age and was
blinded by it. It is remarkable how many of
our harpers have dall incorporated in their
names, a sad testimony to the frequency
with which that dreaded disease afflicted
our race.
Following the fine Irish tradition, the
family of Mac Dermott-Roe, of Alderford
House, Co. Roscommon, befriended
Parts of the Dalivay Harp. 
Turlough and engaged a professional
harper to train him, so that he was fully
proficient by the age of twenty-two years.
His good patrons then provided him with
a horse and attendant, and he began his
peregrinations by visiting the big houses of
the district. "His friends and admirers
increased with his fame," observes Mr.
Millin, "and it is sad to think that this man
of genius was driven from his native
province through the anti-Irish feelings of
the Scotch and English settlers in Ulster."
At least two hundred airs remain to us as
the product of O'Carolan's genius. He
wrote his libretti in Irish and English, and
as a man of refinement and education
was warmly received by all classes
of society from. Letterfian to London. One
of his loveliest melodies is the famous Grace
Nugent, beginning Is miann liom trachtadh air
bhlaith na finne. It was composed for the
lady of his dreams, whom he continued to
love for many years though she was
married to another. It is recorded that he
recognised her once by the touch of her
fingers as he helped her to step into a ferryboat at Lough Derg. He married Mary
Maguire from Co. Fermanagh, and built
her a home near Mohill, though she proved
to be "a proud and extravagant dame."
To her also he dedicated many beautiful
tunes, the best known of which begins,
Mo leun's mo chradh gan me's mo gradh.
O'Carolan came under the influence of
the Italian composers, Antonio Vivaldi and
Arcangelo Corelli, and thus departed from
the traditional tune-structure, as his famous
Concerto will show. In a letter to the Scottish
publisher, Thompson, to whom we have
already referred, the great Beethoven delared
that had O'Carolan been given a
training in music on the Continent he
would have become the greatest ornament
of a school of Irish music. Many of his airs
were stolen by British and Scottish composers
and reappear in musical plays. Thomas
Moore more openly adapted many of them
for his "Melodies", such as Oh! Blame not the
Bard; The Wandering Bard; The Young May
Moon; Fly not Yet and Oh! the Sight
Entrancing.
At the close of his life O'Carolan
wandered through Connacht, and fell ill
in the year 1737, while staying at Tempo,
Co. Fermanagh. He hastened back to the
house where he had been given such
hospitality at life's beginning at Alderford,
bidding a last farewell to his many friends
on the way, for he surmised that his end
was near. He also turned over his last
melody in his mind and set it down when
he arrived. It is his haunting melody,
Farewell to Music. He died on the feast of
the Annunciation, 1738, and was buried in
the MacDermott-Roe vault in the old
church of Kilronan, Co. Galway. A mural
bas-relief in his honour was erected in
Saint Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, by Lady
Morgan. He bequeathed his favourite harp
to his gracious benefactress, from whom it
passed to the O'Conor Don. Another harp
of his was taken to London by one of his
sons.
Bards became almost an extinct race at
the death of O'Carolan, and the music of
the old harpers might have sunk into
oblivion were it not for a memorable
meeting held in Belfast in 1792, prompted
by some Belfast men anxious to preserve
that exquisite music from extinction. A
general invitation was sent out to the
harpers of Ireland and ten responded to the
call. The Feis was held in the Belfast
Exchange, now the Belfast Bank. The dates
chosen were curious-11, 12 and 13 of July.
Six of the harpers were blind, and the oldest
among them was ninety-seven years old.
One of the airs played at this Feis was
Eileen Aroon, and if this hosting of harpers
did nothing more than give the lie to the
Scottish claim, it did well.
But the Belfast Feis did a lot more.
Doctor Bunting was engaged to take down
these old airs, and he recorded in his report:
"The compiler of this volume was
appointed to attend on that occasion to
take down the various airs played by the
different harpers, and was particularly
cautioned against adding a single note to
the old melodies which were found, as we
shall see, to have been preserved pure, and
handed down through a long succession of
ages. Most of the performers attending
the meeting were men advanced in life, and
all concurred in one opinion respecting the
reputed antiquity of those airs which they
called ancient. They smiled on being
interrogated concerning the era of such
compositions, saying they were more
ancient than any to which our popular
traditions extended."
The best-known harp in existence is
surely the so-called Brian Boru harp, kept
in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin,
because it is reproduced on our coinage and
official government documents. There are
romantic tales concerning its date and
origin. According to one tradition it passed
from Ireland to Rome, presumably conveyed
by a son of Brian Boru, whose
famous father was said to have been the
original owner. The general theme of the
legend thereafter follows the pattern that it
was presented by a Pope to an English
king, who in return presented it to some
Anglo-Irish noble. The characters in
different versions of the legend vary from
Pope Adrian IV and Henry II to Leo X
and Henry VIII, (on the occasion on which
Pope Leo conferred on that merry and
musical monarch the title Defensor Fidei),
and to Innocent XI and Charles II.
In the middle of the last century, the
acknowledged authority, George Petrie,
decided that the harp was made about the
year A.D. 1400. Not all scholars agreed.
Some held that Petrie was misled by
ornaments and additions dating from times
when the harp itself was already old, and
so traditionalists hold to the tale connecting
it with the hero of Clontarf. The story
connecting the famed harp with Charles II
is the most probable. The harp may have
been kept in the Tower of London until
the king was told of it by an Irish courtier,
who added that O'Brien, Earl of Thomond,
who believed firmly in the "Brian Boru"
tradition, "would give a limb of his estate
for this relic of his ancestor." The king
graciously had it dispatched to O'Brien,
but it never reached him, though it did
arrive in this country. After being bandied
about, it was at length sold to Lady Henley
"for twenty lambs and as many ewes."
From her it passed to her son-in-law,
Henry McMahon, of Co. Clare, and finally
to the Right Honourable William
Conyngham, who presented it to the
authorities of Trinity College two hundred
years ago.
The famous harp was sent to London
early in 1961 and overhauled with most
careful and delicate skill by the experts of
the British Museum. Putty which had been
used in 1850 in a restoration was removed
from the cracks and the original ornamentation
revealed. The wood of the harp,
identified as willow, was found to be much
worm-eaten in parts and was treated with a
synthetic resin. Wooden replacements for
the missing parts were made, and its
lifetime prolonged indefinitely by the most
expert treatment of modern science and
research. The harp was restrung and the
results were so satisfactory that it was
possible to play it for the first time since
according to tradition it had been played
in the streets of Limerick in the middle of
the eighteenth century. It has thirty strings,
and gives a much purer tone and a wider
scale of harmonies than the modern harp.
The modern cláirseach, being now made in
Dublin, has thirty-one strings, with a
compass of four octaves and two tones.
After the passing of the Coinage Act,
1926, a committee was set up to decide on
designs for a new coinage. At the first
meeting it was decided that "a harp should
be shown on one side of the majority of
coins, if not on all." At a second meeting
it was decided to hold a competition for
designs of our coinage. In August the
Committee reported to the Minister for
Finance: "It is our unanimous opinion that
the obverse side of every coin should, consist
of a harp, with the words Saorstát Eireann,
and the date of issue, that the form of the
harp should be based on the Trinity (or
O'Neill), the Dalway and the Ullard, and
that, if feasible, the same type of harp should
appear on the obverse side of all coins of
the same design. The winning artist was
Percy Metcalfe, who chose the Brian Boru
harp. The first coins bearing the image of
the romantic harp, were issued in the first
week of December, 1928.
Dryden's phrase addressed to the Church
applies very aptly to the Irish harp-"Oft
doomed to death but fated not to die ." Its
revival will help the restoration of our
language and of our beautiful old melodies
in their original form, modulated as they
were to the subtle cadences of speech, and
rich in associations with the triumphs and
tragedies of our race. When they are sung
and understood as they were written, and
not contorted to fit English rhythms by
literary pilferers, we shall have the happiest
example of "music married to immortal
verse."
No one of Irish blood can fail to be
stirred by those ancient melodics to harp
accompaniment, and if there be any truth
in the theory of race memory, the sound of
the Irish harp should verify it, waking
feelings that were old when Diarmuid
wooed Grainne and Ossian chanted his
dirges for the warrior dead. Though music
in general may be, as the Germans say in
one long word, Allgemeinemenschensprache
-the universal speech of mankind- the
Irish harp speaks to Irish hearts in ways only
the descendants of Milesius and the heirs of
Saint Colmcille fully understand. The
history of the Irish harp is the history of
Ireland, full of sweetness and strength, of
Goltraí and geantraí, and all the "still sad
music of humanity."
Detail from the High Cross at Durrow, Co. Laois.
