When the invading Normans
pushed the Munster clans back
towards the Atlantic cliffs and,
inevitably became more Irish than the Irish,
to be pushed in turn by Cromwell and
Carew into the bottlenecks of the valleys
between the Reeks, the strange family of
peoples comprising Kerry folk, was formed.
The O'Sullivans, O'Sheas, MacCarthys,
Sheehans and O'Falveys blended with the
FitzGeralds, FitzMaurices, Blenners,
Hassets, Sigersons and Granvilles. Seed of
the Gael, of the Dane and the Norman, as
the ballads go. They clung like barnacles
to the fiords that lie between the county's
headland "fingers". They made their last
stand. And they survived .. .
Everybody knows that the Kerry people
are "clannish" of the clans. The
O'Donoghue of the Glen fought with the
Desmond Geraldine in the war that ended
with the massacre of Spaniards and Gaels
alike at the rocks of Dunanore. The
Ferriters fought along the Dingle peninsula
and their leader, Pearse, died on a rude
scaffold. But his poetry lived on with the
songs of O'Rahilly and Ó Sulleabhain and
a tradition remained.
Even the great famine was survived and
a sullen protest shocked the English
ascendancy when the Cahirciveen Fenians
sacked Killarney, though they rose too
eagerly, too early, too unreadily.
One might say that at the flash of any
sword or the lilt of any rebel song, Kerry
was always ripe for a blow against the Gall.
So it was in the last war for independence.
Yet, when the fatal shots were fired at
Sarajevo I must point out that as far as I was
aware as a child the funny little men in the
drab uniforms that strolled around the
beaches of the island where I was born
were friendly men enough. They were
what the British army called the "Bantams"
and were far removed from the ideas I had
gleaned of a soldier's image from the
fashionable journals like the Sphere and
London Illustrated News drifting into our
house from the "big house" for which my
father worked. The red-and-blue of the
palace guards was missing.
My father was gardener and yachtsman
for the head of the local, well kept estate
called Glanleam, in the island of Valentia,
in County Kerry. Its owner was Sir John
FitzGerald, descendant of the Queen's
Earl of Desmond and titled Knight of
Kerry.
With the approval of my father and
mother, we children attended parties at the
school to celebrate King George's
coronation, drank cocoa from cups
decorated with that monarch and his wife,
Queen Mary. And we collected cigarette
pictures displaying splendidly dressed
generals like Kichener and Haig and Foch
and the king of Rumania.
The soldiers came and went; the bantams
gave place to the Yorks and Lanes, then
came the Munsters, then the Dublin
Fusiliers. They set up block houses and
canvas tents to guard the Western Union
cable station and the Atlantic wireless
station and on their off nights they came
with the neighbours to dance Kerry sets in
our house down by the shore. The smell
of cordite, the smell of rifle oil, the tang of
barrack disinfectant were rife in the
Valentia ozone to the nostalgic delight of
us children.
The troops paraded with fixed bayonets
to Mass and afterwards we as kids paraded
in opposing ranks, British and German.
None of us liked to be German and only
posed as the baby-killers of Belgium to
keep the play somewhat realistic. Thus we
agreed with our parents, who knew about
such things when they said that the Sinn
Feiners stabbed England in the back somewhere
in the streets of a town called
Dublin in 1916.
"Get over to Mary Shea's for some eggs
for the morning", my mother had told us
on a certain Easter night. And we were
strangely afraid of the helmeted police who
guarded the bridge over Cnoicín river.
But our fears were lost in the wonder of
the great searchlights sweeping the bay of
Dingle that night and we could hear the
sharp yelp of destroyers signalling to each
other from Valentia Harbour to
Ballinskelligs Bay.
But nobody that we knew of had ever
heard the name Casement; not till some
months later when the talk was whether
they would hang him or not. And there
were then fewer and fewer of those who
agreed that he was a traitor. For among the
ordinary people of Kerry there were many,
indeed, who had been too rapt up with the
need to eke out a fishing and farming
existence to bother about the new
Fenianism, though their memories, their
ballads, their fireside tales still, paradoxically,
reminded them of the old.
My father, faithful to his own tradition
of loyal service to a benevolent landlord,
was silent on 1916. It was my mother who
revolted first. My father's people were of
planter stock; my mother came from the
clans; her own uncle Kane O'Mahony was
among that Fenian band that frightened the
English banking men out of Killarney in
the '67. He escaped to America on a cable
ship called Agamemnon.
One day I walked with her to the ferry,
crossed on the boat to Renard; walked to
Cahirciveen. She bought me two books ;
one called Speeches from the Dock; the other
Father Brown's Lectures. "Put a few sods
of turf on the fire," she said when I came
home and as she prepared supper, in the
paraffin oil lamp light I began to read. The
fire began to blaze. The blinding hate from
the British crown grew more fiercely
because the hearth of my mind had been
raked for so long.
Valentia is a thirty-square mile island.
On its west side were the Irish speakers
with their funny names. On the east side
(the cable side) were the West Britons.
The women in the east side wore
fashionable costumes and toque hats; the
women in the west wore black or yellow
shawls. The men in the east side wore neat
blue suits; those in the west wore long
frieze coats, with double buttons above the
split at the back. There were more of the
westerns coming to our house now and
there were strange meetings; and behind
the house men shot at tin cans with .22
rifles.
I was eleven when Dan Breen fired the
rallying shots at Soloheadbeg. I was
twelve when the formerly friendly police
took to raiding houses and for the first time
Sergeant Coughlan, a decent man,
awkwardly carried a black revolver.
The British soldiers guarding the wireless
station spoke no more to the people who
had till now cracked a few jokes as they
passed with their provisions laden in a cart.
We began to hate the union jack still
flying at the coastguard station and to
resent even more fiercely the insulting
emblem of the harp under the crown at
the police barracks.
We awoke to the fact that the neighbours'
sons were organised into company,
battalion and brigade and that Kerry had
three brigades, roughly centred on Tralee,
Killarney and Cahirciveen. I remember a
Republican court being held in the house,
with the local blacksmith, Jack Clifford,
presiding, and Tom Murphy, a scholarly
farmer acting as prosecutor. My father,
converted from his old allegiance, seemed
to have developed a fanatic zeal for the
Irish cause but it was only in the truce
time that I realised he had been intelligence
officer for the Kerry third brigade,
commanded by Jeremiah O'Riordan, with
Denis Daly, whom the people said had
"fired the first shots from the G.P.O." as
his second in command.
The disputes at the courts were usually
over land, rights of way or ordinary fist
fights and generally all parties were
inveigled into shaking hands as they
smoked the pipe of peace together and
drank my mother's tea.
Every house had souvenir pictures of the
1916 leaders, generally surmounted with
the tricolour. Ballads of freedom were on
every child's lips and Kerry was boasting
that The O'Rahilly had died in the glorious
retreat through Moore Street and that
Thomas Ashe had commanded the only
engagement fought in 1916 when his
Fingallians routed the garrison at
Ashbourne.
Any allegiance we had left to the old
regime was banished by the national
teacher, John G. Mawe, an ex-Saint Enda's
man, by Claud Cheavasa and Fionan
MacColuim pounding the glories of the
Gael into our receptive breasts in resurgent
Kerry Irish.
The drama of Easter Week inflamed us
and the facts about those probing searchlights
in the bay a few years before were
borne in on us. It was far later, especially
in the civil war time, that anybody raised
a controversy about the happenings on the
morning Casement was arrested at Banna
Strand. Austin Stack's enemies said that he
and his Volunteers should have rescued
Casement from Tralee barrack. But the
greater number of Kerrymen believed that
Stack did the correct thing-that he had
faithfully carried out the orders from
Dublin not to make any attack on the
enemy until the Dublin men began.
A local martyr, honoured in our own
part of the country, was Con Keating. But
it must be realised that when a car carrying
four men took the wrong turning, when
travelling west at Killorglin on that Good
Friday, the neighbours rushed to help the
confused driver, Tommy McInerney, as
they would rush to help any man. Few
knew of the dramatic mission the four men
had been carrying out.
They had been detailed to seize wireless
equipment from Valentia so that they
could confuse the British navy searching
for the Aud with its load of guns. Tommy
Mclnerney was the only survivor. Charlie
Monahan of Belfast, Donal Sheehan of
Newcastle West and Con Keating of
Caherciveen were drowned in the Laune.
Thus Kerry had at least two local
tragedies to live down when the fight began
that Easter-the arrest of Casement and the
deaths of the four daring Volunteers in a
Kingdom river.
Many say that the threat of conscription,
opposed by priests and people, caused a
swelling of the ranks of the Volunteers.
That there were men who thought it safer
to join a home army that might never fight
than die at "Suvla or Sedd-el-barr". And
that Dan Breen with his Soloheadbeg shots
showed them the moment of truth. Be that
as it may these men proved their worth
when, virtually untrained, they prepared
and fought their guerilla battles, and the
companies and battalions were formed in
Kerry as elsewhere.
It is a strange thing that the first real
example of the desire to resist injustice came
not from the ranks of the Volunteers but
of the Royal Irish Constabulary.
This force proved to be either the
strongest or weakest plate in the
government's armour according as the
policemen acted on behalf of the crown or
on behalf of the people, and, later, Michael
Collins was to make good use of these who
were loyal to their own folk. It was the
police who thrilled Kerry with a wonderful
exhibition of chivalry-in Listowel
barrack.
The mutiny at Listowel followed a phase
in the war, the earlier part of 1920, during
which the Republican courts ousted the
British courts from the county. The Kerry
summer assizes were held for the last time
that year and at them the scant attendance
was informed by the grand jury that
twenty-five police barracks, four coastguard
stations and three court-houses had
been burned and six police patrols had been
ambushed.
Justices of the Peace all over Kerry were
resigning. In six weeks one hundred and
seventy-seven of them quit their
responsibilities.
One would expect that Irishmen,
traditionally stubborn, who had been loyal
to the service in the police, would have
become a little tougher with these upstart
Volunteers taking the "law" into their own
hands.
But at Listowel it so happened that
Colonel Gerard Bryce Ferguson Smyth,
the new divisional commissioner, was
visiting. A brave man this who had lost an
arm in battle against the Germans, and was
four times mentioned in despatches. He had
urged many a Britisher into the Royal
Irish Constabulary to strengthen that force,
in the belief that all personnel with the
king's badge on their caps were automatically
as loyal as each other. Colonel
Smyth's instructions were to ask the police
at Listowel to hand over their barracks to
the military and to be transferred as
directed to different stations in the county.
The R.I.C. decided not to obey. Perhaps
Colonel Smyth used the wrong arguments.
He told the fourteen men that up to the
present "the Shinners" had had all the
sport, and the police would have to take
the offensive rather than be cooped up in
their barracks. He was getting "as many
troops from England as I require." He was
getting 7,000 more police-from England.
He then outlined what the R.I.C. had to
do. To patrol the country, lie in ambush,
order all civilians to put up their hands and
be searched, shoot them if they were slow
in obeying, shoot them if they approached
with their hands in the pockets, shoot them
if they acted in any way suspiciously. "No
policeman will get into trouble for shooting
any man. Hunger strikers will be allowed
die in jail. Some have died. It's a damned
bad job all of them were not allowed to die.
We want your aid to wipe out Sinn Fein."
And so passionate was Colonel Smyth
about the affair that he offered any man
who was not prepared for all this to leave
the job at once. He meant without pension
of course, the usual threat to long-serving
men.
The spokesman for the police group
gave the answer.
"By your accent I take it you are English.
You forget you are addressing Irishmen".
Taking off his cap, belt and bayonet he
flung them on the table saying "these, too
are English. Take them, you murderer!"
Colonel Smyth stuttered to the rest of the
force to arrest the spokesman. They told
him to get out fast.
Five of the policemen resigned almost
immediately. The rest reported the matter
to members of parliament and the incident,
aired in the Brittish Commons, gave some
indication to the English people of what
was going on in the island next door.
Other inspectors went to other Kerry
barracks to give the new orders. A host of
resignations from the force followed. Most
of such men joined up later with the
Volunteers.
As for Colonel Smyth, later that month,
July of 1920, the belligerent officer strolled
into the county club for presumably a
brandy night cap. Six Volunteers entered
the club, their leader addressed Colonel
Smyth. "Your orders are to shoot at sight,
Colonel" he said. "We are carrying them
out." Smyth was almost at the inside door
when he fell. Mercifully, indeed, because
five bullets were fired and five hit him.
The terrain of Kerry is such that guerrilla
warfare can be carried on for a long time
with less equipment and arms than one's
foemen, especially as the people in the glens
and hills were fully in sympathy with the
cause.
During 1920 the crown forces were
largely cooped up in the towns and at any
time they moved out they were in danger
of being ambushed.
Their frustration made itself felt during
the first week of November, 1920. The
deaths of MacSwiney by hunger and Kevin
Barry by the scaffold had fired the I.R.A.
with vengeance. Ambushes around Tralee
were frequent in the days before these men
died.
The British decided to "take it out on
the town." They had burned much of
Cork city; now the capital of Kerry was to
feel the enemy's hate. For all of the first
week of that November the military took
over the streets, shooting at random.
Houses were burned deliberately, night
after night. People scurrying from the
scarred buildings were shot at indiscriminately.
For the whole week no
business could be carried on. Even the dead
could not be buried nor the wounded
attended to. When at last the merchants
appealed to the military commander to
ease up, as the people were starving, the
only reply he received was that the town
was not under martial law and that he
could not usurp civil power (the alleged
authority that had closed down the factories
and bakeries). The burnings and shootings
continued until 8 November when a
proclamation was issued saying, "business
may be resumed in Tralee in view of the
hardships imposed on loyal subjects."
It was during this autumn that a very
fearless Major McKinnon came to take
charge of the Auxiliaries in the Tralee area.
He was so reckless that he did not fear to
go out alone after suspect I.R.A. men, and
he loved to lead his Auxiliaries into the
small villages arow1d the town to shoot
them up. In one such raid he came upon
two unarmed Volunteers, enjoying a
Christmas welcome (1920) in a neighbour's
house at Ballymacelligot. McKinnon gave
them no chance. He told his group to
riddle the two men, Leen and Reidy.
His fanaticism for golf was great as the
major's hatred of the I.R.A. It was his golf
that led him to his well-deserved end.
Believing that the local golf links were
carefully sealed off by his own forces, the
major generally took a regular day off on
the links.
Four ambushers waited for him on the
course near the third green. There they
shot him dead. It was the habit of guerilla
fighters to pick off the ringleaders of a
remorseless enemy as often and wherever
they could.
Ambushes were of course held all over
Kerry, mainly on small parties of police
and Black-and-Tans, the county being too
rugged for any large forces to operate in.
The I.R.A. therefore moved about in
small parties, acting on information usually
received from police acting for I.R.A.
intelligence.
Probably the "Crossbarry" of Kerry
might be Headford Junction where the
Kerry 2 brigade, under Tom McEllistrim
and Johnny O'Connor fought virtually
hand to hand along the railway carriages
carrying rations for the British troops. The
British admitted an officer and six other
ranks killed with twelve wounded. The
I.R.A., in fact, on that day killed twenty-four
British soldiers and wounded many.
I.R.A. losses were two, Dan Allman and
James Baily.
North and South Kerry had many
engagements involving units of British
troops and small columns of Volunteers,
but there was no grand scale battle.
Nevertheless, the dead mounted up among
the Irish for many Volunteers were killed
when caught by enemy patrol forces, few
prisoners being taken in County Kerry.
The "Valley of Knockanure" has become
almost a national ballad because of the
cruel deaths, by bullet and bayonet,
suffered by three Volunteers who were
captured unarmed in that glen near
Gortaglanna. Their names were Dalton,
Lyons and Walsh and the full story of their
brutal killing was told afterwards by a
fourth man, Con Deed, who miraculously
escaped though desperately wounded.
The many crosses on the Kerry roads
testify to the many Volunteers who were
thus cruelly killed. Most of these men
believed that their fight would win an
Ireland fully free from landlords and
exploiters from the centre to the sea. Yet
few paused to define the Irish Republic
whose flag they followed.
Making Ireland a Hell.
The Freeman's Journal 1920-'21
HAMAR:- What did you tell him, Mac?
MACREADY:-That we're restoring order in Ireland.
HAMAR:- And what does he say?
MACREADY:-That we're raising hell everywhere else.
