It is not known definitely when horse
racing was first introduced into western
European countries but a record still
exists of the earliest horse-race in England
which took place in Yorkshire about
A.D. 210 between Arabian steeds brought
to England by the Roman Emperor
Septimus Severus Alexander.
There are some early accounts of matches
between horses but racing did not become
fashionable until the reign of King
Richard I when the barons and knights of
the Crusades pitted their horses-for the
most part brought back from the Holy
Land-over a two or three mile course
before the King and his Court.
In 1540, during the reign of King
Henry VIII, the first race-course was
officially established at Chester. In 1574
Queen Elizabeth attended the races at
Croydon, while King James I built new
stables and a grandstand at Newmarket, one
of a growing number of race-courses
including Chester, Croydon, Doncaster,
Liverpool, York, Salisbury, and Lincoln
which had been established by that time.
But it was King Charles II who popularised
the sport more than any of his royal
predecessors. Before the Restoration
Cromwell had stopped all racing, not
because he hated the horse and racing-on
the contrary, he bred and imported horses
by the thousand mainly to build up his
formidable light cavalry. But he was no
doubt convinced that race meetings would
provide excellent opportunities for the
royalists to gather together and to plot.
Charles II quickly set about leading his
country from. the dark, austere days into
every kind of enjoyment, especially racing.
He himself was a first-rate horseman and
took part in many races at Newmarket
which he made the headquarters of racing.
James II and William and Mary had little
interest in racing but Queen Anne made
many improvements to the Arab Stud
Charles II had established. She raced much
at Newmarket and opened a private course
at Ascot.
With the advent of the Georges, racing
had become firmly established both in
England and in Ireland. It is fitting that the
first recorded steeplechase took place in
Ireland and that occurred in 1752 when a
Mr. O'Callaghan raced Mr. Edmund Blake
over a stiff four and a half-mile crosscountry
course from the church at
Buttevant, Co. Cork, with the spire of
Saint Leger Church as a landmark to the
winning post. These epic and often haphazard
matches became a common enough
sport among the Irish gentry throughout
the remainder of the eighteenth century.
The improvement of the home-bred
horse whose ancestor Eohippus was a mere
dog-sized, hoofed quadruped, went on by
leaps and bounds from the time of Richard I
to Charles II when the pure-bred Arabian
stallions were mated with English hybrid
mares at the end of the seventeenth
century. Thus speed, the main attribute of
the Arab or Barbary horse, was successfully
intermingled with endurance or stamina
which our horses had in abundance.
For centuries racing was solely a pastime
for the wealthy. Today, it is not just the
"Sport of Kings" but a sport of kings and
commoners, a sport that eventually gave
rise to the modern saying that "all men are
equal on and under the turf'.
Horses were formerly raced by their
breeders only. The only transactions passed
were in bets, and fortunes were won and
lost. Business gradually began to play an
ever-increasing role in the sport or hobby
of the privileged few, and this by breeders
whose main object was selling their
yearlings and standing their stallions at stud
for a fee. Bloodstock auctions like Tattersalls
in England and later Goff's in Ireland were
set up and the annual turnover of these
great firms now runs into millions.
Ireland has for long enjoyed a lively and
valuable export market in horses and this
is now valued at approximately £5,000,000
per annum. Breeding racehorses and hunters
for market has become a major Irish
industry and it was recently suggested in
Dail Eireann that Ireland should become
the world capital of horses-“this country
has the climate, the inclination and the
know-how."
The Irish government is not blind to the
importance of Irish racing and breeding as
an industry and will shortly establish the
Horse Board which will have many useful
functions including the setting up of a stud
book to protect the small farmer with a
mare or two for breeding.
The British Racehorse, a magazine of
undisputed authority, pointed out in an
editorial that Ireland is a growing rival to
English commercial breeders-"Ireland
offers unlimited scope to breeders of
thoroughbreds now that all taxation on
activities concerning the horse has been
removed. This attraction promises to make
her the foremost centre of thoroughbred
breeding in the world.
"With heavy taxation imposed upon
those who breed racehorses in England and
the U.S.A., the growing numbers seriously
involved in the enterprise in either country
are likely to move their studs to Ireland.
"Already the Irish Sweeps Derby has
attained international status, and the
growing prosperity in the Irish bloodstock
industry will enable the value of important
races in Ireland to be raised further."
For the past five years the world-wide
winnings of Irish-bred horses totalled well
over £10,000,000. Hundreds of studs,
from the National Stud in Co. Kildare to
the numerous small-holdings throughout
the country have contributed and are
contributing to this enterprise, and not only
in racing but in the show-jumping and
hunting field.
Ballymoss
Ballymoss ( T.P. Barns up). By Mossborough 9M of Indian Call.
Standing at the Whitsbury Manor Stud, Fordingbridge Hants., Ballymoss was champion racehorse
in Europe in 1958, winning the Coronation Cup, the Eclipse Stakes, King George VI and Queen
Elizabeth Stakes and the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe among other races. As a three-year-old he won
the Irish Derby and English St. Leger and was second (to Crepello) in the Epson Derby.
He was leading first season sire in 1962 and leading sire of winners in 1967. His best progeny include
Royal Palace (2,000 Guineas, Derby) O'Hara (big stakes winner in America) Ansasta and Merry
Mate both won the Irish Guinness Oaks.
Selectivity in breeding is vital to its
success but the Irish scil with all its natural
trace elements necessary for the rearing of
good horses is probably the greatest
contributory factor in the success of the
modern Irish horse.
Wartime exigencies in England necessitated the ploughing up of great tracts of grassland. Artificial fertilisers were used in the growing of new grasses and English bloodstock suffered to some extent. Not so in Ireland where the old grass with

ARKLE
Arkle, Pat Taaffe up, doing a round of honour at the Spring Show, Bailsbridge, Dublin, a gelding
by Archive out of Bright Cherry won 26 races, value £74,520. 5s. od., which is a record for a
National Hunt horse. His many great triumphs include three Cheltenham Gold Cups (1964-'66),
the Irish Grand National (1964), Whitbread Gold Cup (1965) and the Hennessy Gold Cup (1964
and 1965). Undoubtedly the greatest steeplechaser of all time.
centuries of mixed goodness remained
untouched and we have been able to
produce animals of good bone and
substance.
While the Irish-bred horse has virtually
dominated the steeplechasing world for
years-approximately two-thirds of the
one hundred and twenty-five Grand
National winners are Irish-bred - it attained
a new and exciting pinnacle of achievement
with the advent of the peerless Arkle; the
Irish-bred 'flat' horse was recently propelled
into the forefront of international
racing, not only by big and astute breeders
like the late Aga Khan and Joe McGrath,
but by trainers like Vincent O'Brien,
Paddy Prendergast, Seamus McGrath and
Mick Rogers
These are the men who "make" the
horses. Vincent O'Brien is regarded as the
greatest trainer in the world. Before
Vincent made the transition from National
Hunt racing to Flat racing he had trained
the winners of three consecutive Grand
Nationals, anf also completed hat-tricks in
the Cheltenham Gold Cup and the
Champion Hurdle. Fellow jump-trainers
Tom Dreaper and Paddy Sleator were,
an still are, greatly feared in England but
never quite to the same extent as Vincent
HARD RIDDEN
Hard Ridden, held by William Burke who later rode Santa Claus to win the Irish Sweeps Derby.
Hard Ridden became the first Irish - trained winner of the Epsom Derby since Orby had triumphed
fifty-one years previously. Bred at Sir Oliver and Lady Lambert's Beau Pare Stud in Ireland, Hard
Ridden was submitted as a yearling to Ballsbridge where he was purchased for only 270 guineas
by Sir Victor Sassoon. He was the cheapest horse to win the premier classic since Little Wonder had
changed hands 120 years previously for 65 guineas-taking into account the lowering in the value
of money. Foaled in 1955 Hard Ridden is by Hard Sauce out of Toute Belle II by Admiral Drake
out of Chatelaine by Casterari. He won the Irish Two Thousand Guineas prior to his success in
the Epsom Derby (Charlie Smirke being his successful partner in both races) and was, in December
of 1967, exported to Japan where he now stands at stud.
O'Brien who between 1947 and 1959 sent
forty horses to England to win fifty-one
National Hunt races valued at over
£75,000.
Ballymoss and Gladness launched O'Brien
on his great flat race training career,
Ballymoss becoming the first ever Irish
trained horse to win the Doncaster St.
Leger and Prix de l' Arc de Triomphe,
while Gladness, one of the truly great
racemares in the Annals of the Turf, won
the Ascot Gold Cup, Goodwood Cup and
Ebor Handicap among other important
races.
O'Brien completed the rare Grand
National-Derby double when Larkspur won
the Epsom. Derby in 1962. Sir Ivor and
Nijinsky also won the Derby, the former
becoming the first Irish trained horse to
win the great American Invitation race, the
Washington International, while Nijinsky,
undefeated in his nine races at the time of
writing, is being compared to the Italian
Ribot and the French Sea - Bird II, the
greatest racehorses of our time. The
"wizard of Ballydoyle" has won virtually
every race worth winning including all the
classics in England and Ireland and now
enjoys the patronage of some of the
wealthiest magnates of the Turf including
the American Charles Engelhard, owner of
Nijinsky.
Paddy Prendergast has enjoyed big
American and English backing, ever since
the days he sent out a series of brilliant
two-year-olds to capture the prestige
English races open to them., and to prove
that he was not only a handler of two-year-olds
went on to plunder an enviable bag of
classic and middle-distance events abroad
with horses like Ragusa, Meadow Court and
Noblesse. Like Vincent O'Brien he became
leading trainer in England on more than
one occasion.
Hard Ridden ended a fifty year break by
becoming the first Irish horse to win the
Epsom Derby since Orby in 1907. He was
trained by Mick Rogers who before he
retired in 1970 sent out the brilliant
Santa Claus to win the 1964 Derby and the
Irish Sweeps Derby.
But for me the greatest and perhaps the
most far-reaching achievement attained by
any one Irishman in racing was by Seamus
McGrath when he sent out Levmoss, a
horse he owned, bred and trained himself,
to win Europe's most valuable race, the
1969 Prix de l' Arc de Triomphe.
McGrath built up this horse very
gradually into the superb racing machine
he was by the time he reached four years
old. He won the Prix du Cadran, the French
equivalent of the Ascot Gold Cup with
him and then went on to capture the Ascot
Gold Cup, a feat that had only once before
been accomplished. Few believed that the
Co. Dublin trainer could possibly bring
back a horse from winning over two and a
half miles to score over a mile and a half
in such a short period of time and, moreover,
in the best company of three and
four-year-olds upwards to be found in
Europe. He did, and Levmoss won this
£90,000 race in record time, beating that
wonderful English mare, Park Top. That
could truly be termed the training feat of
the century.
The U.S.A. bred Sir Ivor and Nijinsky
will eventually be lost to Irish breeding
when they join their owners' studs in
America, but Levmoss, an all-Irish bred,
stands in Ireland and must surely be a
tremendous asset to Irish breeding.
Seamus McGrath, whose father, the late
Joe McGrath, bred and owned the English-trained
Arctic Prince, winner of the 1951
Epsom. Derby and to whom Irish racing
owes such a great debt, also prepared
Sweet Mimosa, a full-sister to Levmoss, to win
the Prix du Diane or French Oaks in 1970.
Ireland has not only produced great
breeders and trainers but jockeys and
horsemen like the Molony brothers,
Martin and Tim, the Beasley brothers,
Aubrey Brabazon, Joe Canty, Steve
Donoghue, Michael Beary, T. P. Burns,
and Pat Taaffe, architect of so many notable
triumphs on Arkle, who recently, at the
age of forty years rode his second Grand
National winner.
The administrator of Irish racing is the
Racing Board, set up in 1945. It derives its
entire revenue at the moment from the
profits on the operation of the Totalisator
and the proceeds of a five per cent. levy on
all race-course betting with bookmakers.
Profits are ploughed back into Irish racing,
through contributions to stakes, money,
free carriage of horses and grants to less
well-off racecourses.
In 1969, prize money of almost
£1,000,000 averaged £853 for 1,124 races
contested in Ireland and ranged in value
from a minimum £300 at the smaller
tracks to £ 75,000 for the Irish Sweeps
Derby.
SANTA CLAUS
Santa Claus, (W. Burke up). Bay horse, foaled 1961, by Chamossaire out of Aunt Clara, by
Arctic Prince, out of Sister Clara (half-sister to Sun Chariot).
Santa Claus won the National Stakes, Curragh, at two years by eight lengths; the Irish Two
Thousand Guineas; the Derby, Epsom (beating Indiana who subsequently won the St. Leger) and
the Irish Sweeps Derby, also second in the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes and the
Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe.
He was champion of his generation at two and three years and, at the tinie, highest English or Irish
stakes winning three-year-old, £132,103, also winning £2,584 in stakes at two years. He was
from the family of Sun Chariot (One Thousand Guineas, Oaks and St. Leger), Carrozza (Oaks),
Cherry Lass (One Thousand Guineas and Oaks) and Blandford (the leading sire).
He stood at the Airlie, Lucan, Co. Dublin, Stud until his death in 1970. Reindeer (Irish St. Leger
and Prix Kergorlay) is his best son to date, while Santa Tina (Irish Guinness Oaks, 1970) is his
best daughter.
Over £4,000,000 was staked on the Tote,
while course bookmakers' turnover
amounted to £9,832.000. The surplus
from the Totalisator account was £392,769
while the levy collection on the bookmakers
amounted to £479,077. The Racing
Board contributed £661,632 towards stakes
(the rest of the £1,000,000 being made up
by sponsors and owners) and £104,735
went to the carriage of horses to various
tracks throughout the country.
Of the thirty-odd race-courses in Ireland
a number are running at a financial loss.
The Racing Board states that it cannot
Sir Ivor (Lester Piggott up) a painting by Susan Crauford.
Sir Ivor is American - bred) winner of the National Stakes and Grand Criterium at two years and
the 2,000 Guineas, Epsom Derby, Champion Stakes and Washington International at three years.
He finished second in the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe. Altogether he won 8 races (7 furlongs-
12 furlongs: and £169,957 in Ireland) England, France and U.S.A. Retired to Stud in 1969 he
stood for a year at his owner's Ballygoran Stud, Maynooth, before being sent to stud in America.
By Sir Gaylord out of Attica by Mr. Trouble, Sir Ivor is owned by Mr. Raymond R. Guest,
former American Ambassador to Ireland.
continue to finance these unprofitable
meetings and have given five racecourses
notice that they will receive no further
support after two years. Without grants
from the Racing Board they are doomed.
Nobody really wants to see a racecourse
die, particularly some of those little country
tracks which have a charm of their own
a are very often set in picturesque
natural surroundings. If they go, a social
amenity will be lost to large hinterlands and
neighbouring towns, to be replaced by
flapping, a sport harmful to racing. Furthermore,
many of the smaller owners and
trainers might be deprived of opportunities
to win a few of these small races which are
principally designed to attract the more
moderate animal.
That is the argument against closure of
some of the smaller courses. But finance is
playing a very big part in modern racing
and the Racing Board is fixing its attentions
on the more profitable tracks, like
Leopardstown, the Curragh, Phoenix Park,
Fairyhouse and Punchestown in the east,
Galway in the west, Killarney, Tralee and
Listowel for the holiday crowds in the
south-west, Tramore in the south-east
(another holiday fixture), Gowran Park for
the large area serving Kilkenny, and
Limerick Junction and Limerick itself
I have made the rationalization of Irish
racing as put forward by the Racing Board,
smack of centralization-but that I believe
is what it exactly is. Centralization is no
bad thing, for it cuts down on travel and
gives these courses a real chance to improve.
In 1967 the Racing Board intervened to
safeguard the important flat and jumping
track at Leopardstown, about eight miles
south of Dublin city centre. Situated near
many fashionable suburbs including
Foxrock, Leopardstown had long been eyed
by property developers but the Board loathe
that racing should lose this, the oldest of
the three metropolitan courses which has
been in operation for close on one hundred
years, stepped in and bought out the
shareholders' interest. Two years later, in
1969, the Leopardstown Club appointed
the London firm of architects, Howard V.
Lobb and Partners, architects of the famous
new grandstand at Doncaster, to prepare a
modernization plan for Leopardstown racecourse.
The existing grandstand was torn
down and has been replaced by a grandstand,
I am confident, will be hailed as one
of the finest in Europe. The course has been
completely returfed and improved in every
aspect. The new Leopardstown will attract
many new customers for every amenity
will be provided, including adequate
viewing space, easy access between the
viewing facilities overlooking the course
and the parade ring, betting halls and
totalisator buildings within the grandstand,
numerous bars and restaurants, cloak rooms
and lounges. Indeed Leopardstown will set
the pace for the new-look racing of the
seventies and in this the Racing Board is
mindful of attracting the young. It is only
by creating satisfied customers that money
will be received which enables racing to
continue with healthy vitality.
The signs are that Sunday racing will be
firmly established within the next five
years. All kinds of problems, not least the
problem of increased wages will have to be
ironed out, but racecourse executives are
convinced that their gate receipts will be
at least doubled on Sundays.
Nowadays the public expect higher
standards of amenities but so far as racing
is concerned they still prefer really good
sport. Up to the building of the new
Leopardstown the amenities have not been
good on some Irish racecourses but racing is
cheap-admission prices are not much
more than they were in 1938-and the
sport is generally good with betting
opportunities at virtually every meeting.
Falling attendances is a major problem
on English racetracks. There are six major
causes: (a) the opening of betting offices
since 1961; (b) the increase in live coverage
of horse-racing by television; (c) an increase
in competition from other sports and in the
number of ways in which the public can
spend its leisure hours; (d) the high cost of
travelling and admission to racecourses;
(e) the poor standard of amenities and
catering at some racecourses; (f) the
difficulties of access to and egress from
racecourses, either by public transport or
by private car.
Some of our Irish racecourses suffer from
declining attendances but these are not
occasioned by any of the above reasons
given by the Benson Report on the racing
industry in England, but for some strange
reason there are Irish towns that will not
support their local meeting which is
forced to rely on the patronage of the
hinterland and the regulars from Dublin.
It is for the racecourse managers concerned
to circulate in their towns and whip up
support through every available means of
local publicity-even gimmicks. One or
two I know have done this and have,
moreover, received sponsors for their
Levmoss, foaled 1965, by Le
Levanstell out of Feemoss by
Ballymoss. Won 8 races (6 ½ furlongs
-20 furlongs) in Ireland, England
and France including the Prix du
Cadran, Ascot Gold Cup and
Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe. Retired
to stud at Brownstown Stud,
Curragh Camp. Along with
Ballymoss and Arkle he was one of
the greatest Irish-bred horses of all
time.
races, with conspicuous success. It is,
however, a sad fact that many of our
race-course executives are content to sit still
and do as little as possible.
The most important single factor in the
future of the racing industry is to establish
an appropriate level of prize money. For a
small country Ireland does not do badly in
this respect and at least two of our classics,
the Irish Sweeps Derby and Guinness Oaks,
both of which receive generous sponsorship,
are adequately catered for. Prize money is on
the increase in Ireland but sight must never
be lost of potential sponsors.
The Irish Turf Club and the Irish
National Hunt Steeplechase Committee are
the ruling bodies respectively for flat racing
and steeplechasing and derive their powers
through the administration of the rules
which they carry out in a similar way to
the Jockey Club and National Hunt
Committee in Great Britain. The three
stewards of the Irish Turf Club and the
three stewards of the Irish National Hunt
Steeplechase Committee are elected by the
members of the respective bodies; each
steward serves for three years and retires
by rotation. New members are elected by
the members of the respective bodies.
The Racing Board consists of eleven
members, six of whom must be members of
the Irish Turf Club or the Irish National
Hunt Steeplechase Committee. The other
members must be persons connected with
racing, or ownership or breeding of bloodstock,
or bookmaking or similar pursuits.
Each race meeting has its stewards and
these gentlemen on the whole have a sound
knowledge of the sport. If something
untoward occurs during the course of a
race, like crossing, bumping and boring,
dangerous riding, blatant stopping of
horses, discrepancies in form, it is the
function of the stewards' secretary to call
in the accused party and advise the stewards
on what has happened. They are often - but
not in all cases-aided by the patrol
camera film of the race and on this film
and the report of the stewards' secretary (a
man well versed in all aspects of the sport)
they base their judgements.
The Turf Club and Irish National Hunt
Steeplechase Committee appoint the
stewards to each meeting just as they grant
the necessary licences to racecourses to
hold meetings and draw up the fixtures
list for the season, issue licences to trainers
and jockeys or suspend or" withdraw them
as the case may be. They also appoint
handicappers, clerk of the course, clerk of
the scales, starters, and judge.
Racing has many facets: breeding,
owning, training, jockeyship and, for the
average racegoer, betting. It is betting that
keeps the sport alive but a proper approach
to this particular aspect is essential if one is
to enjoy racing and, indeed, to continue in
racing.
The first, the cardinal rule for the
would-be punter is never to wager unless
he can afford to lose. He must have a sound
knowledge of the breeding and past racing
of thoroughbreds, remembering, of course,
that horses are not machines . He must not
be greedy-if he makes a profit or his
expenses he should rest on his laurels for
the remainder of the day. He should ignore
those dreams of 100-1 winners-most
winning horses are returned at prices
varying between 7-4 against to 9-2. He
should concentrate on the best class horses,
the top trainers and jockeys. If possible he
should follow money from the big betting
stables. He must never follow bad money
with good and if he is serious about making
racing pay-and very few consistently do - he
must never mix drinking with punting.
Value for money is important. Odds-on
chances are generally bad value and it is
surprising how many of them lose. Finally,
there is no such thing as a winning system,
unless of course the bookmakers have it.
In the last decade the Irish-bred and
trained racehorse has made tremendous
strides. Racecourses will improve and
attendances will increase. I say so
confidently because this great sport and
great industry is in a healthy state and in
the hands of those who know what they
are about.
