To-day Ireland and Austria are only
a few hours' flying time apart. The
two peoples have much in common:
a history rooted in religion and tradition, a
sense of ancient loyalties-yet they are less
close to, and less conscious of, one another
now than they were three hundred years
ago. There are many reasons historical and
geographical for this; Austria is in the
heart-land of Europe, and Ireland has only
emerged from being isolated as "an island
behind an island," to use the words of
Arthur Griffith.
Furthermore, the old close relationship
was based on members of aristocratic
families who, from. the Cromwellian period
onwards, found a ready welcome in the
polyglot and multi-racial Austrian Empire
because of their gifts of military leadership.
Irish names in Austria today are, by and
large, associated with the old land-owning
aristocracy, the "Emperor's men". The
ordinary Irish soldier of the Wild Geese
headed for the nearest friendly shore, which
was France. The relationship with France
was thus more democratic and robust.
For any Irish person, modern Austria is
a country that merits study because of the
difficulties it has overcome in the last quarter
of a century and because it is one of the
sturdiest small democracies in Europe, with
its two almost evenly balanced major
parties, its prime minister and its president.
The present prime minister who heads the
socialist party is of Jewish origin which
shows how little bigotry there is in this
overwhelmingly Catholic nation of over
seven million people. It has had an
astonishing story of success since May,
1945, when the great cathedral of Saint
Stephen in Vienna, the heart of Austria,
was shattered, the famous opera-house lay
in smoking ruins and British, American and
Russian troops wandered through the
rubble-strewn streets of the desolate city.
In the cold and snow of the winter of that
year with no glass in the windows, no
electric power and little fuel and with
rations below the subsistence level, the
Austrians could have been forgiven if they
had despaired of the future. They did not.
To-day, Saint Stephen's and the opera-house
have been restored, lovingly, stone
by stone, all occupation forces are gone
since 1955, and Austria is a model country
with full employment and one of the best
social security systems in the world. Indeed,
a major problem facing the authorities
nowadays is to arrange adequate parking
facilities in the city of Vienna and the
provincial capitals. With six hundred miles
of Communist frontier, Austria maintains
a low-profile approach in foreign affairs but
its neutrality is based on friendship for the
whole world and it is a genuinely friendly
country whose foreign minister does not
suffer from the forked-tongued syndrome.
It is also a country to which the stranger
likes to come back and its tourist trade,
which is an all-the-year-round one, is
flourishing. It has much to offer: Vienna
the unique, the beautiful centre-piece of the
nine provinces is once again a world capital
with its magnificent churches and baroque
palaces, its parks and squares, its music and
its Gemuetlichkeit, and each one of the
provinces with its diversification of scenery
has something special to offer-from the
storks nesting in the reeds of the Neusiedler
See in the flatlands on the Hungarian
border to the glaciers of the Glockner or
the peaks of Vorarlberg.
Indeed, sometimes one gets a little
irritated; some of the scenery and the
settings, urban and rural, are so colourful as
to be almost unreal and slightly Style carte
postale as the French say. One looks into a
snug valley in winter with the onion-domed
church and red roofs, the village inn with
the evergreen branch above the door, the
well-dressed, rosy children pulling their
miniature sleighs and one feels, somehow,
that there should be a greeting on the
bottom of the picture and a stamp on the
back. However, it is all real and the peaks
stretching their weight of snow away into
the distance are homely in a special sense.
In the American Rockies one often feels
alienated by the barren heights as if the
mountains had looked down too lately and
too long on loneliness and wilderness. In
Austria they have sheltered kind valleys
with churches, schools and art-treasures for
fifteen hundred years and more. Somehow
it makes a difference, especially when one
steps out of the cold into the warm glow
and the friendly welcome of the very three-dimensional
inn.
What historical background gave us this
Austria of to-day with its sturdy democracy
married to old traditions? It is a question
that cannot be fully answered in a short
article but it can be said at least that the
mission of Austria with its empire was an
honourable one even though it has been
vilified and denigrated by modern historians
with a few honourable exceptions. In the
passions and tensions released after the
1914-1918 war, it was far too easy to select
obvious scapegoats for the general failure
of Western man's system of ethics and for
the eroding of European values generally,
and to allocate war guilt to the beaten only;
lazy intellectuals could point to the
Habsburg empire as an absurd and stupid
anachronism, with its obvious faults and
omissions, conveniently forgetting what it
had done or had tried to do over the
centuries often with considerable success.
Professors talk of a sense of historical
mission, forgetting that to survive and to
try to maintain a civil and humane approach
to life is often for a country beset with
problems a tremendous feat in itself. For
many countries because of their geographical
situation the rumbling of the
abyss can always be heard in the distance
and the steersman cannot relax.
Austria's rulers initiated many movements
that contributed to European
civilisation and to a more decent approach
to life. It is often forgotten that Maria
Theresa brought in compulsory education
in 1775 for children between the ages of six
and twelve with special classes on Sundays
for all between twelve and twenty who
wished to attend. Again one hundred and
twenty-five years later, prior to the 1914
war, the social security arrangements for the
Vienna worker in health or illness were, on
the whole, better than those of England,
the heart of the world's greatest industrial
empire.
It must be remembered, too, that the
Austrian empire was for the most part
gained by marriage with all the consequent
dynastic accretions over the centuries and
not by the sword. As Matthias Corvinus
put it: Bella gerant alii, tu, felix Austria,
nubet (Where others blood must shed, you
happy Austria, wed).
In the mixture of races in Central and
Eastern Europe which followed the Turkish
invasions and the wars of religion, it would
have been impossible to allocate territory
on a purely ethnic basis and for this reason
there had to be then some administrative
and social focal point. The Italian Crispi
said: "If Austria did not exist she would
have to be invented."
At various stages of their existence and
at different times, the emperors considered
themselves to have three missions or
objectives in the general context of
European civilisation and development:
(i) To protect the Eastern flank of Christian
Europe against Turkish invasion; (ii) To
preserve the counter-Reformation; (iii) To
evolve (under the emperor) into a federal
system or a customs' union area or even a
United States of Central Europe with a free
population of fifty million people, each
self-governing, but loyal to a focal point of
unity, the emperor. It is easy with historical
hindsight to say that these barely
adumbrated objectives at various stages of
the empire's existence were only smokescreens
or conscious efforts by cunning
statesmen to justify selfish, naked power
politics with a hard dynastic core. The
argument is not totally valid.
Let us look at the Turkish question now
sunk so low below the horizon of the
European racial memory that its former
menacing importance could easily be
forgotten or devalued. The Turks were, and
are, a vigorous race. Up to two hundred and
fifty years ago, they were a spreading
proselytising and conquering people, highly
cultured, intelligent and, militarily speaking,
as advanced and well armed as any nation
in western Europe. Lepanto might have
frustrated their attempted domination of
the seas, but their territorial ambitions had
not been noticeably diminished.
They had beaten the hardy Serbians at
Kossovo-the field of the Blackbirds-in
1389 on Saint Vitus Day-the Vidovdan of
the Serbs-a day to be remembered always
in Serbia and destined to be a jour fatidique
for Europe over five hundred years later.
They captured Belgrade and the historical
and picturesque fortress of Kalemegdan at
the junction of the Sava and the Danube
and occupied it until l859; they over-ran
most of Hungary and the pashas revelled in
the hot springs of Gelert Hill above
Budapest. Four times the Turkish armies
arrived within sight of Vienna and, had the
Imperial city fallen, all Europe would have
been opened to the Turkish armies and
subsequent history would have been a very
different story.
The last siege of Vienna may be regarded
as one of the decisive engagements in
European history. A close-up look at it
must be of interest to any European
conscious of the common traditions of
Christianity and the dangers that often
menaced them. It took place in 1683-only
seven years before the Battle of the Boyne - and
was the most prolonged, the most
dangerous and the most nearly successful
attack of all. A fitful peace treaty then
existed between the Turks and the emperor
but Vienna was still an outpost city situated
where the Alpine foothills slope down to the
Danube crossings, and the great Pannonian
plain of the Romans stretches flat and
endless to the east.
Vienna, encircled by the Turks in 1683. As we look towards the south-west we see left centre the walled
city of Vienna. All around, drawn up in ranks are the enemy. From the west where the flag-crowned seal
is shown came the relieving armies. About where the drum is with the crossed drumsticks, Father Marco
d' Aviano celebrated Mass.
Vienna was already a city of ancient
culture-a walled city dominated as to-day
by the immense spire of Saint Stephen's.
Inside the walls was a thriving University,
and the Capuchins, the Jesuits, the
Dominicans, the Franciscans are some of the
orders whose churches, built with dignity
and style, graced many of the city's streets.
Nevertheless, the thought of being a
frontier post lurked in the recesses of the
minds of the Viennese. How many times
had the towns to the east-Bruck, Swechat
and Fischamend crackled into flames as the
invading Turkish horsemen galloped ahead
to trample the vineyards? How often the
Tuterkenglocken, the warning bell against the
Turks, had rung out over the city! The
danger could not be forgotten.
In the autumn of 1682, a fateful conference
took place in Istanbul, presided over by
Sultan Mehmet IV. The Grand Vizir, Kara
Mustapha-a name to frighten children
still in central Europe-urged, and forceful
man that he was, got sanction for, a new
aggressive policy towards Austria. He
pointed out her weaknesses; worry about
the tough French policy of Louis XIV in
the west, and the recent decimation of her
people by the Great Plague which had raged
through Vienna and, indeed, all Austria, in
1679. Now was the time to attack Austria
in strength and subdue it finally.
A look at a map of Europe of the time
underlines how valid his argument was.
The Ottoman Empire stretched from
Egypt to Istanbul, north to the Dnieper
River, and from the Dnieper west to
within seventy miles of Vienna. The
combined soldiery of this land-mass if once
assembled would be a force that could
crush with a hammer-blow the heart of the
Habsburg Empire, the city of Vienna, the
fall of which would make their advance on
the west comparatively easy.
Pope Innocent XI, acutely aware of the
imminent danger, urged the Emperor
Leopold (and, indeed, other European
rulers who would listen to him) to concentrate
all available forces on opposing the
coming Turkish invasion. The pope's
strongest aide and one of the most
remarkable men in the period of stress was
the energetic Capuchin, Father Marco
d'Aviano, who, by word and letter, gave
emphatic warning of the gravity of the
danger. If to-day the statue of Father Marco
looks out on the Neuer Markt from the
wall of the Capuchin church whose vaults
hold the coffins of all the emperors, it is an
honour well-merited from the Austrians - and
from Europe.
Meanwhile, Imre of Hungary complicated
the dramatic situation further by adopting
the overlordship of the Sultan. The central
European dynasts were beginning to realise
that an army of l50,000 men was assembling
in the east. Messages went out from Vienna
stressing the imminence of the grave danger.
Charles of Lorraine, a fine soldier, was
confirmed in the post of leader of the
Austrian army in the field; it totalled only
45,000 infantry and 17,000 cavalry.
The pope pressed King John Sobieski of
Poland to listen to the request of the
emperor for help and the Papal Nuncio
Pallavicini, was instructed to sell church
lands to subsidise the payment of Polish
soldiers. At the same time the emperor's
ambassadors at all the German courts begged
that help be sent to Austria if the Turks
should cross the border. In January, 1683,
Prince Stahremberg took command of
the artillery and the imperial fortresses of
Gyor and Pressburg (now Bratislava) on
the Danube to the east were strengthened.
Father Marco d'Aviano went to Rome for
a hurried consultation with the pope.
The invading forces were already being
marshalled. The sultan's army, under Kara
Mustapha, was assembled. Hussein of
Jordan came with his troops. Egypt sent
auxiliaries. There were tough Tartar horsemen,
swift and ferocious; soldiers from the
Turkishhinterland, Janissaries from Salonika
and from every other city where the
Crescent flew. Through Sofia and Belgrade
they marched all through the spring of 1683
in endless dusty columns, and by May of
that year they were assembled in Budapest
for the big attack. Even then many
European rulers did not believe that Kara
Mustapha would dare attack the imperial
city of Vienna. They still played local
politics and the petty power-game so that
the city almost fell by their default. The
Turks attacked Gyor.
Charles of Lorraine with his special aide,
the Irishman, Colonel Francis Taafe,
advanced to its relief He was beaten and
retreated slowly westwards in good order,
keeping his small army intact. Petronell and
Fischamend fell to the Turks and then
Swechat where Vienna airport stands today.
The emperor and his pregnant
empress were advised to retire up the
Danube towards Melk. Lorraine retreated
across the Danube to the north breaking
down the bridges he had crossed. He left
Stahremberg to defend Vienna with eleven
thousand troops, calling on him to hold it
at all costs for three months. On 14 July,
1683, Kara Mustapha moved his army
forward and laid siege to Vienna and sent a
formal demand for surrender. This was
ignored. The walls of Vienna were strong
with fortified bastions, but as the people
stared down from them on that July
morning they must have felt subdued.
Trampling on and tearing down the vines,
long lines of camels moved across the
vineyards around the city, as strange a sight
to the Viennese as would be crocodiles in a
Connemara trout stream; the wild Tartar
horsemen, with their reputation for burning
and slaughtering, wheeled and turned on
their long-maned horses that sped off like
the wind at the twitch of a rein; miles of
tents began to spring up for the army and
its followers-now totalling 160,000 men;
the flames of burning towns and churches
sent up pillars of smoke to the east and
south. The defenders may have been awed
but they had decided to die rather than
surrender.
The tough Bishop Kollonics of Wiener
Neustadt remained with his people in
Vienna. He ordered all monasteries and
convents, contemplatives and others, to be
ready to receive the wounded. To help pay
his soldiers he emulated Hilary of Arles,
who, long before this, confiscated the
episcopal treasury of the Primate of
Hungary-gold florins and ecclesiastical
plate for this purpose. He and the mayor
were of significant help to Stahremberg
throughout the siege.
Day and night the Turkish forces drew
nearer and artillery bombardments burst
into the city; the Heidenschuss-the street
of the Heathen Shot, derives its name from
the battering it had then, and there is a
wine keller near by where the proprietor
points proudly to old cannon balls stuck in
the roof since then. The Turks mined a
defender's position, the besieged an
attacker's line ; sometimes the Turks
managed to penetrate a ravelin but were
always beaten out. A way to the north
pressed by the nuncio, King John Sobieski
of Poland began to move from Warsaw to
join Lorraine. The Bavarians, too, and the
Saxonians took the slow road to Vienna.
Father Marco in seven league boots came
rushing back from his colloquy with Pope
Innocent XI, armed with the full power of
papal legate to bless the relieving armies
slowly assembling.
July passed and all August. Sickness was
rife in the hot, stifling city. Food was
becoming scare~ and the very old and the
very young were dying. Several horsemen
swam the Danube with messages to
Lorraine. On 2 September, part of the wall
of the Burg bastion fell. The situation was
becoming desperate with the garrison
reduced to seven thousand bone-weary
men. A final horseman swam the Danube
by night. His message for Lorraine was
simple: "For God's sake, Lord Duke, come
quick!"
The relieving armies, Poles, Austrians,
Saxons, Bavarians, crossed the Danube that
Forty-eight-year-old Father Marco of Aviano, Capuchin preacher.
night and during the following days. But
the hills of the Wiener Wald had still to be
crossed. On the night of 10 September,
observers in Saint Stephen's spire saw
rockets rising from. the Kahlenberg Hill to
the north-west. Father Marco was there
with the advance troops, pushing and
urging them. by word and letter. A letter to
the emperor on the early morning of
11 September is headed, "Dal monte a
veduta da Vienna ! » The Wiener Wald hills
had to be climbed and the Klosterneuburg
gorges crossed. (On a bright spring day I
have tried, lightly dressed, to make this
journey and it is an exhausting walk. One
can only admire the heavy laden soldiers
who had to do it at night and then fight a
battle.) One of Kara Mustapha's pashas
warned him that the relieving forces might
attack him next day before Vienna fell. He
replied calmly-he was a good soldier: "no
army can cross the Wiener Wald at night".
It was a reasonable military assessment. But
it was done. All that hot night of
11 September they climbed the wooded
hills. in the darkness, dragging themselves
over the gorges, pushing desperately upward
in lines and companies. At five
Vienna, showing Saint Stephen’s Church (centre), the Imperial Palace, (right), inside walls which
show the ravelins built around them.
o'clock in the morning Father Marco
offered Mass for them on the top of the
Kahlenberg, where the Polish church now
stands. His altar was of upturned drums
and his server was King John Sobieski.
They attacked down from the hills that
Sunday morning without taking any rest,
and in sweltering heat pushed on to Vienna
below in the plain with the Danube curling
past it to the north. It was a savage fight.
By evening the Turkish army, utterly
routed, was fleeing towards Budapest,
leaving its luxurious and well-stocked tents
and supplies behind. Vienna ate well that
night, and King John Sobieski clanked into
the Augustiner Kirche to offer thanks. As a
postscript of history we may record the
thanks given to Kara Mustapha by the
Sultan. On Christmas day in 1683 the
official executioner from Istanbul arrived in
Belgrade and strangled him. The Sultan
did not approve of failures.
The tremendous upsurge in Austrian
culture, art, architecture may be dated from
the successful end of the siege. Church after
church, palace after palace sprang up,
daring in concept and style like the
wonderful Karlskirche of Fischer von
Erlach, or the Palaces of Belvedere and
Schoenbrunn. Vienna had no longer only
the Gothic spire pointing like a finger to
heaven but the early, the high and the late
baroque buildings, with gorgeous facades
in gold, blue and pink, angels and cupids
rioting in colour crammed with intricate
detail. It was heaven made homely, as if
the Austrians were expressing their relief.
Melk, Salzburg, Graz, the provincial cities,
equalled, sometimes excelled, Vienna in the
Baroque Organ in Gottweig
Church, Lower Austria.
Baroque High Altar, Saint
Paul's Church, in Lavanttal
Carinthia.
Baroque ceiling, Altenburg
Church, lower Austria.
Baroque Museum, Vienna.
The architectural masterpieces, the Belvedere Palace.
The Schonbrunn Palace.
Cattle Market in Maria Plain near Salzburg.
contest of building and use of rich colours
in paintings and ornamentation.
The mosaic-like empire composed of
historical accretions continued to survive
and thrive, and it emerged stronger than
ever after the Napoleonic wars. The
populations remained loyal during the fierce
surge of new ideas after the French
Revolution. This loyalty to the old regime
may be largely attributed to Maria Theresa's
son, the Emperor Joseph II, who, as early
as 1765, had introduced the Dominical and
Rustical Law, which not only gave the
small farmers fixity of tenure but forbade
such land ever being bought up by the
rich landlords. It was a wise law and farseeing,
which preserved to Austria for ever
a stock of self-confident small farmers and
guaranteed the survival of the country's
integrity for many years.
The baroque period of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, which gave
Vienna and Austria so many ornate
buildings, gradually waned and was
succeeded in the nineteenth century by
what the Austrians call the biedermeier
period. Biedermeier style was more homely,
not only in its lack of flamboyant ornamentation
but in that it gave beauty to
ordinary homes in furniture, paintings of
friends, good miniatures. This in turn gave
way to the age of Makart-the great painter
of Salzburg. He was young and impetuous
but Vienna adored him. There were
Makart roses, Makart costumes and Makart
hats with their high flowers and long
feathers. Makart was commissioned to
organise the procession for the silver
wedding anniversary of Franz Joseph and
Elizabeth in 1879. It was called Makart's
Procession and the Empress wore a Makart
hat. The artist died at the age of forty-four
years; his paintings and those of his school
epitomize the spirit of Franz Jospeh's reign.
Franz Joseph had come to power in the
Catarina Cornaro.
year 1848-a year of street fights,
revolutions and toppling thrones. No one
trained by Metternich could have democratic
principles but in his strict old-fashioned
way, Franz Joseph served his
people tirelessly for over sixty years, and
the people in the end appreciated him and
grew to have a great affection for him. His
life was one of tragedy on the grand scale;
his brother, Maximilian, was executed in
Mexico; his beloved wife, Sissi, well-known
on Irish hunting fields, was assassinated in
Geneva; his son and heir, Rudolf, died with
his mistress, Maria Vetsera, in the hunting
lodge at Mayerling on a snowy night in
January, 1889. That probable suicide has
been made the subject of endless books and
films.
Mayerling is a village sheltered in a
valley of the Wiener Wald, as dreamily
beautiful in winter as in summer. The
baroque hunting lodge in yellow is now a
convent of an enclosed order given over by
Franz Joseph for prayers in perpetuity for
the souls of Rudolf and Maria. The place of
the suicide is now the convent chapel where
the nuns pray behind the grille. I saw it
recently on a spring day, when, although
the woods were carpeted with primroses,
snowflakes like small afterthoughts of
winter were still falling. Already two busloads
of tourists were there staring at the
yellow building in the hollow while a
French guide explained the Church law on
suicide and why Rudolf was buried in the
Capuchin crypt with his ancestors while
poor Maria Vetsera lay in the monastery of
Heiligenkreuz across the hill. It was
depressing and one can imagine how old
Franz Joseph would have shuddered at the
lack of dignity, the tearing away of the
facade of decency and privacy. But it was
the loss to Austria that counted, for young
Rudolf had a liberal outlook and visualised
maximum freedom for all, Austrian and
Hungarian, Serb and Croat. He might have
Saint Charles Church, Vienna.
stepped into the twentieth century with new
and vigorous ideas. Before he died he had
revealed his thoughts in letter to liberal
thinkers like Moritz Szeps: "Social upheavals
will come from which a new
Europe will flourish", he once wrote in one
of them-with remarkable prognostication.
The new heir, Franz Ferdinand, was a
different kind of man-big, sombre,
military in his bearing. He was disliked by
the Viennese who found him lacking in
gemuetlichkeit. In so far as he ever thought
out a policy, he wanted peace with the Slav
people, especially with Serbia, which had
emerged tough and vigorous and proud
from under Turkish thraldom. Serbia
wanted (what it has to-day) a kingdom of
the south Slavs which could not, of course,
be realised without incorporating Bosnia
and Herzegovina which had only recently
been integrated with the Austrian empire.
So the tragedy came to its culmination, a
tragedy for the world as well as for Austria.
As inspector-general of the forces Franz
Ferdinand was invited to the military
manoeuvres in Bosnia in the summer of
1914. In itself this was an insult to the
Serbs with whom he wanted amity-and
because he considered it a friendly gesture,
he decided to visit Sarajevo, the beautiful
capital city of the province, on the hill
slopes above the valley of the Milijacka
river. To aggravate this irrational decision,
he chose the Vidovdan of the Serbs, 28 June,
the feast of Saint Vitus, for his visit and
announced his programme well in advance.
It was an open invitation to assassination.
When years before his secretary told him
that the king of Portugal had been assassinated,
he exclaimed, "They are shooting
us now like sparrows on the rooftops.'' He
must have forgotten.
A first attempt was made to assassinate
him as he and his wife drove to the town
hall. It failed. The second did not. As he
drove from the town hall in the heat of the
morning along by the river embankment,
the car took a wrong turn and the chauffeur
was ordered to reverse. He stopped and as
he started to reverse slowly in front of
where Gavril Princip, the nineteen-year-old
leader of the student conspirators, was
standing despondent over the earlier failure
of his colleague, Princip stepped forward
and fired two shots. They killed Franz
Ferdinand and his wife-and triggered off
World War 1. The contraption of a car
with its high uncomfortable leather-backed
seats stands forlorn in the Arsenal Museum
of Vienna to-day-a sorry memento of a
tragic episode that brought in its train a
holocaust of human beings. The Slavs were
proud of young Princip and his youthful
band, and have called a street and a bridge
after him in Sarajevo.
I know an old Viennese lady whose small
apartment looks out on the gardens of the
Belvedere. She is gay and witty in the
Viennese fashion, although she has had
much tragedy in her life. I asked her once
about the golden age of pre-1914 Vienna.
"you know", she said, eyes smiling behind
the spectacles, "I don't know who Saint
Vitus was, but he led us a poor dance on his
feast day at all events. And things were
lovely in those days."
"But", I pointed out, "Vienna is a
beautiful and prosperous city to-day."
"Yes, but it is not the same. People had
less then, but they were more considerate
and more humane before all the wars and
killings. I know there were many people
poor but food and wine were cheap and we
were all sure of ourselves as we have never
been since. I remember so well the Sunday
that Franz Ferdinand was killed. It was the
most beautiful day of that perfect June and
I was crossing the Volksgarten with my
poor mother to our apartment on the
Ringstrasse after visiting 'Grossmutter'
(Grandmother). The flowers were in bloom
in the park and the birds singing gaily. My
mother remarked to me, 'There is something
wrong', because the men were all
talking together in groups and appeared
excited. As women, of course, in those
days, we couldn't stop to ask questions but
when we got home father told us that the
news of Franz Ferdinand's death had come
in from General Potiorek in Sarajevo. That
bright June day was our Gotterdammerung
and we did not know it. However, maybe
something else would have started the war
if that didn't."
Perhaps, although in a competition in an
English newspaper for unusual headlines the
prize went to "Franz Ferdinand alive! Great
War a mistake!" Empires must disappear and
nations like the Poles and Serbs must reach
their normal independent development.
But what if freedom had "broadened down
from precedent to precedent?" What if old
injustices had been removed and what if
honourable habits and customs had, as
Yeats put it, "made old wrongs melt down
as it were wax in the sun's rays?" There is
no answer now. The final word on Sarajevo
was said triumphantly by Hitler, "Franz
Ferdinand", he exulted, "the greatest friend
of the Slavs, had fallen under the bullets .. of
the Slav fanatics". It was the supreme irony.
In four years, eight million people were
dead of wounds in battle because Franz
Ferdinand was shot at Sarajevo. Truncated.
and poor, Austria dragged on in the postwar
years until the tragedy of the Anschluss
in 1938 when the Nazis took over; and after
the second world war she was occupied
again.
The pre-1914 Austria had its obvious
faults. The Autobiography of Arthur
Schnitzler, the Austrian playwright, who
was of Jewish origin, shows that, especially
in the army, there was anti-Jewish prejudice.
Yet he spent a supremely happy
youth and manhood in the Vienna of the
Makart period-and nostalgia glows in his
book. Indeed, it might be true to say that
nowhere in the world did the flower of
Jewish genius blossom as in pre-1914
Vienna. Again, Victor Adler, the Austrian
Socialist, went to the Socialist Congress in
Paris in 1889 and denounced Austria
ringingly-"it is a police state tempered
by Schlamperei" (inefficiency), he
thundered. But he came home to a Vienna
where all the papers had published his
wise-crack and no one harmed him or
thought any the worse of him for his
oratory. An unusual police state, surely!
Austria to-day is tolerant and good-humoured
in the old tradition. The Viennese
must make their cynical wise-cracks mostly
about themselves or the government, but
they still go out to the suburb of Grinzing
in the Vienna woods to drink the new wine
of the local vineyards in the Heurigen and
to sing the old songs: Meine Mutter war eine
Wienerin or Ichweiss auf der Wieder ein
Kleines Hotel or In Prater bluhen wieden die
Baume (In the Prater, the chestnuts are
blooming). The greetings are formal,
Gruess Gott!-God be with you! Kissing
the hand is a courteous memory of more
kindly days. The bells of Saint Stephen's in
Vienna ring out at Easter over a prosperous
city of tradition because tradition rules here
more than in any country in Europe:
traditions of religion and culture; of wine
and food. In the province of the Burgenland
they will always serve Saint Martin's goose
for dinner on Saint Martin's Day (as they
once did in Connacht); the people of Tirol
wear their national costume naturally and
not as if dressed to impress the tourists. In
summer the fiacres are everywhere, drawn
usually by two grey horses. To me, the
Vienna looking south east-a map of 1570 A.D. by F. Houfnagl.
An old engraving showing the mocking of the Grand Vizir Kara Mustapha, Turkish renowned
military leader on his return to Constantinople after his failure to take Vienna.
loveliest sight in Vienna is the day of
Confirmation or First Holy Communion.
It is a day made memorable for the children
who are driven to church in the fiacres
which are made gay by ribbons and bunting
on the carriage and on the harness. Afterwards
they are taken to the Prater and the
fun-gardens by the Riesenrad. This treat,
picturesque beyond words, is an old, old
tradition.
One admires the care of graveyards in
Austria. On All Souls' Day the people
throng to the graves of their families and
pile flowers on them and again at Christmas
when hundreds of candles in their windshield
brackets flicker on the graves across
the snow. This is an attractive custom and
one may see in many places the Lichtsaeulen
or Pillars of Light which have been lighted
in graveyards from mediaeval times.
Traces of the Irish are everywhere in
Austria. Some of the best generals and
officers in the Imperial army were Irishmen,
Taafes, Laceys, Brownes, Ryans, O'Neilans.
As one drives along the autoroute from
Vienna to Salzburg one sees rising on a
height above the Danube what appears at
first to be a mirage; it is the monastery of
Melk with its half mile of golden wall and
baroque towers rising sheer from the river.
It has many treasures but they will always
take you to see the coffin of Saint Colman
above the altar; Saint Colman of Ireland
who was martyred there in the eighth
century. In Vienna there are a Schottenstift,
Schotten Ring and Schottengasse called
after the Scotti, the Irish monks. One's
chauvinism was flattered to hear this verified
from the altar of the Schottenstift by the
lord abbot in his sermon on Saint Patrick's
Day this year when the papal nuncio said
Mass and blessed and distributed shamrock
to the congregation in which many official
bodies were represented. It was the revival
of an old tradition; Maria Theresa ordered
all Irish officers to wear "a special emblem"
in honour of the Irish patronal feast day.
Legend tells us that: Irish monks were
thought to be unruly or were accused by
the German Benedictines of being so and
an order was made that "the monastery be
no longer reserved for Hibernians". One of
the accusations made against them was that
they "played ball games" and one senses
that national rivalries had penetrated the
cloister. They were disbanded and the
monastery given to the German
Benedictines but: they had left a memory, a
church and a name to a whole area of
Vienna.
To-day there is a flourishing Austro-Irish
society in Vienna with headquarters in the
Palffy palace and it publishes an Austro-Irish
Review. There is a similar society in
Ireland founded by Robert Dubsky. The
two countries are again establishing close
contacts. It is well that it should be so, and
Irish people should be interested in a small
and friendly country which lifted itself by
hard work from its prostrate position of
1945 to its present-day situation with a
sound economy, full employment, a
thriving population and with two international
organisations located in its capital
city. It stands as a sound example to all
small countries. Above all it keeps its
traditions.
The Capuchin church in the Neuemarkt, Vienna. It is one of the attractions of the city for its crypt.
The crypt has eight chambers, some of them faced with Carrara marble and in these are buried twelve
emperors, sixteen empresses and more than one hundred archdukes. Some of their remains are in
simple lead coffins, others are more ornate and precious. That of Joseph I is made of solid silver,
others are ornamented with figures and other adornments. The most striking tomb is that of the
Empress Maria Therese and her Consort Franz Stefan of Lorraine. The effigies of the pair kneel
facing each other and an angel with a trumpet stands at the head of the tomb. In the same chamber
lie the bodies of most of their fourteen children. The ill-fated Marie Antoinette, wife of King Louis XVI
of France was guillotined during the French Revolution. The church has also a sculpture of Father
Marco of Aviano.
