The following pages have as theme episodes of history that find a parallel in every Irish
rural parish. In 1837 in the thatched chapel at Kilcrohane, Muintir Bhaire, where
south-west Cork thrusts itself into the Atlantic, Jeremiah O Sullivan married Mary
Daly. Their home was a two-roomed cabin high up on the windswept hillside of Letter
East. Here the young couple looked out on the beauteous shapes and colouring of mountain,
valley and sea. Otherwise, nature was niggardly of endowments; in Letter East half a
sheaf was half-an-acre’s corn. The struggle for life was grim-but there was always
the potato! Six children were born in the cabin. In 1855 the bailiff and his death-riders
descended on the remote shieling; Jeremiah O Sullivan, his wife and family were evicted.
The youngest child was a baby six weeks old. A kind neighbour gave shelter for a few
weeks. Then there was a sojourn in Whiddy island. Finally, the entire family emigrated
to America. All contact with Ireland was lost.
One hundred and thirteen years later, two great-grandsons of Jeremiah O Sullivan
and Mary Daly returned to Muintir Bhaire. They were men of eminence and distinction
in a great American city. They sought the remnants or site of their ancestral home, and
to pick up, if possible, lost threads of family history. They had little difficulty; the
memory of the eviction was still vivid. It was told and re-told at fireside and roadside.
Cousins were sought and found: Dalys, O Sullivans, MacCarthys, O Donovans.
Soon the ruined cabin on the hillside was transformed to a pantheon of Irish ancestors
whose names are the matrix of Munster history. It was a shrine that held the title-deeds
of a hitherto unknown family heritage; the crumbled walls were a mosaic fashioned of
floating star-matter.
The great-grandsons of the bridal couple of 1837 confessed to a feeling of pride and
joy; they spoke a panegyric of sadness. Someone murmured a phrase from Francis
Thompson’s Moestitiae Encomium: sorrow is the pain which is mortise to delight.
Reverently, the two Irish-Americans removed stones from the mountain shieling to
serve as reminders of present pride and joy.
At their request we shall try to give an outline of the history of Muintir Bhaire where
it all happened.
Mr. H. V. Morton's arrival at Killarney
was a caesura in his Irish odyssey: "I have
no energy to fight the beauty of Killarney.
On the way there I hoped to be able to find
fault with it because professional beauty
encourages a mood of faint resentment." If
we trace his route we find that he permitted
himself only a brief prospect of Bantry bay
at Glengarriff and then turned northwards
to Kenmare and Killarney. One wonders
what Mr. Morton might have written had
he been tempted by the distant scene across
the bay. Perhaps the heathered slopes of the
crouching hills were clouded with spindrift,
or, more likely, the billowing clouds of
ocean mists intervened. We must regret
that Muintir Bhaire was excluded from one
of the most delightful records of Irish
travel. The very remoteness of Muintir
Bhaire has warded off the "professional
beauty" of which Mr. Morton disapproved.
Yet here is Gaelic Ireland in microcosm:
pre-historic monuments, castles, ruined
medieval churches, mountain peaks and
valleys, fiords and islands where myth and
history have a common ethos. It is the
country of O Mahonys, MacCarthys,
O Sullivans, O Donovans, and of O Dalys.
Let us then to Muintir Bhaire, an Irish
Atlantic outpost, known to the few, but
first a word to the learned. Geologists tell
us that Muintir Bhaire "comprises the
Upper Old red sandstone and carboniferous
slates; strike faults which are closely spaced,
vertical or steeply dipping upthrusts form
the dominant feature of the peninsula which
may be broadly compared to a large-scale
fold produced by strain-slipped cleavage.
With the exception of the western
extremity where the cliffs rise sheer from
the sea and where southerly dipping beds
have created dangerous overhangs,
practically the whole coastline is accessible."
The highest point is Seefinn (1,136 feet)
where Finn macCool, the Irish legendary
hero, rested from the chase. Disclaiming
pretentiousness we shall endeavour to give
an historical survey of Muintir Bhaire from
the earliest times to the present day.
Corca Luighe
Irish lore ascribes mythical origins to the
Corca Luighe or the race of Lughaidh. The
Genealogy of Corca Luighe, as found in
the Book of Lecan, is a fifteenth-century
compilation by MacFirbis. Clearly, the race
of Lughaidh was widely dispersed in
Ireland but one of the most authentic
settlements in the pre-Christian era was
along the south-western littoral of Cork.
One of the princely figures was Fothradh
Canann of whom an apostrophe tells us
that he obtained the government of the
whole world from the rising to the setting
of the sun and that he took hostages from
the birds of the air and the fish of the sea!
A much more historical figure was his
descendant Baire who settled with his
people on the rocky headland that divides
Bantry and Dunmanus bays; hence the
area is designated as Corca Luighe-Cuile,
that is, of the angle. By some kind of
metonymy topographical meaning was
attached to Muintir Bhaire or the people
of Baire. The terrain holds many reminders
of its early inhabitants: lioses or duns,
promontory forts, earthen caisils, gallauns,
and stone alignments. There are at least a
score of lioses, some of which are quite
distinctive. The massive caisil at Rathura,
near Dunbeacon, bears comparison with
any of the series at Garranes, north of
Bandon, early medieval citadel of the Ui
Eachach or O Mahonys. Almost adjoining
the fort at Rathura is Lios Catha with a
triple fosse. On the northern side of
Dunmanus bay at Rosnacahara is a towering
caisil with a deep defensive fosse.
Surviving place-names afford more
tangible evidence of the occupation of
Muintir Bhaire by the Corca Luighe.
Probably, Maghnus of the Ua Cobhtaigh
(O Cowhig and Coffey) of the Corca
Luighe gave his name to the bay. On a
little headland he built a dun-Dun
Maghnais or Dunmanus. A little to the east
Sun and cloud over dunmanus bay.
Becan of the Muintir Bhaire built another
fort-Dun Becáin. In later centuries the
O Mahonys erected castles on the sites:
Dunmanus and Dunbeacon castles, the
ruins of which are still to be seen.
As a seafaring people the Corca Luighe
had easy contact with the European mainland.
Hence Christianity was introduced
into southern Ireland, probably from France
and Spain, before the arrival of Patrick.
Ciaran of Clare island and Declan of
Ardmore have prominence in Irish
hagiology as pre-Patrician saints. Naturally,
Ciaran is given due prominence in the
genealogy of Corca Luighe.
Population movements in Munster
during the sixth and seventh centuries
brought an incursus into Cork of a leading
Eoghanacht sept, the Uí Eachach, or as they
were known in later times, the O Mahonys.
They occupied a vast stretch of territory
from Cork harbour to Carn Uí Neid or the
Mizen head in the extreme south-western
littoral. The occupation was completed
before A.D. 800. Consequently, the race of
Lughaidh was restricted to an area bounded
on the north by the Bandon river and
reaching from Courtmacsherry bay to
Roaring Water bay. For the Corca Luighe
the results were by no means catastrophic.
A closely knit seafaring race emerged. The
descendants of Eiderscál, a tenth-century
figure, established a hegemony-to be
known in history as the O Driscolls, with
castles at Dun na Sead at Baltimore, Dun
na Long on Sherkin island, Dun an Oir on
Clare island, Castlehaven and several other
coastal strongholds. Although the name
O Driscoll is a modern synonym for the
Corca Luighe many other families have a
similar ancestry: Cronin, Coffey, Delea,
Dineen, Dowling, Duggan, Dwane,
Fehilly, Hennessy, Hogan, Horan, Lynch,
Nolan, O Leary. In the encroachments of
the O Mahonys, and later of the
MacCarthys, on the Corca Luighe the dim
outlines of Munster history until modern
times may be discerned.
The O Mahonys
With the consolidation of the O Mahony
occupation of the Fonn Iartharach or
Western Land the entire area of Muintir
Bhaire passed from the Corca Luighe. For
many centuries to come the name
O Mahony was to be a chapter heading in
the history of Munster. That the sept in the
Western Land was a highly organised,
social and military unit finds evidence in
the series of castles-twelve in all-along
the coast from a point east of Schull
harbour to the Muintir Bhaire peninsula.
In fact, one-fourth of the castles erected in
Cork by Gaelic families was erected by the
O Mahonys. The best known are
Ardintennant, Rosbroin, Leamcon, Dunmanus
and Dunbeacon. Perhaps the most
evocative of the O Mahony strongholds is
Dun Locha near the Mizen head, built,
according to the Annals of Inisfallen, in
1207. The triple towers, linked by a
seemingly impenetrable bastion, still stands
on a precipice looking down, in Synge's
phrase, on the green delirium of ocean. At
Dun Locha the heavy tread of the years is
cushioned, time easily rolls backwards. One
feels that one of the famous O Mahony
chieftains, Donaugh na h-Imirce or Conor
Fionn, might yet ride out at the head of
seventy horsemen and two hundred kerne.
About 1430, Donaugh Mór O Mahony
built a formidable fortress at Dunmanus. A
stone carving, high up on the western wall,
is said to represent the features of the
builder. Also to be seen are the scars of a
siege by Carew's forces in 1602. Until recent
times there was a flanking wall guarded by
four watchtowers. A little distance up the
bay is Dunbeacon castle, built by Donal,
brother of Donaugh Mór. The period-mid-
fifteenth century, was the high summer
of O Mahony power. Although little now
remains of the stronghold at Dunbeacon,
it knew the limelight of history. It was
captured and retaken in 1602. We gather
something of its ancient prestige in another
source. In 1633 Dermod O Driscoll, an
Irish exile in Spain, sought admission to the
Spanish knightly order of chivalry known
as Santiago. Proof of honoured lineage was
a necessary condition of admission.
O Driscoll supplied testimony that he was
the grandson of Joanna O Mahony of
Dunbeacon castle. She was also the mother
of Sir Fineen O Driscoll, a dashing figure
honoured in ballad and legend. She must
have been a lady of some distinction; an
elegy by an O Daly poet refers to her as
'Joanna of the race of heroes."
Any picture of the O Mahonys that
relegates the sept to the remoteness of an
inaccessible land is far from the facts. Thus
Fineen O Mahony of Rosbroin castle was a
distinguished scholar, linguist and translator.
In 1475 he translated into Irish a
well-known medieval classic, The Travels
of Sir John Mandeville. The seagirt castles at
Rosbroin, Dunmanus, Dunbeacon, and
Rossmore bore a commercial significance
throughout the sixteenth century. Records
in the State Papers of the period, supported
by Philip O Sullivan in his Compendium of
the Catholic History of Ireland, show a
flourishing commerce between the ports of
the Western Land and The Low Countries,
France, Spain and Portugal.
One of the ironies of Irish history is that
despite its geographical remoteness, the
sept of the O Mahonys was one of the
earliest to succumb to English power. The
decline began with the defeat of the
Desmond rising in l580. Donal O Mahony
of Rosbroin was attainted; in 1584 his
castle and demesne were granted to Oliver
Lambert. But all was not over. In 1601 the
O Mahonys hastened to join Hugh O Neill
before the battle of Kinsale. Carew took
vengeance: in 1602 he captured and sacked
Dunmanus and Dunbeacon castles.
Although there was only partial expropriation
of O Mahony lands, despoilers
appeared in Richard Boyle, later earl of
Cork, and Sir William Hull. Hull occupied
Dunbeacon castle and its demesne; his
memory still lives along the shores of
Dumnanus bay. The final debacle came in
the aftermath of the general uprising in
l641. The distribution of O Mahony lands
is documented in the Books of Survey and
Distribution. Dermod O Mahony of
Muintir Bhaire, one of the surviving landholders,
forfeited l,400 acres. Then the
"camp sergeants, bullies and sundry wights"
appeared in the list of grantees: Richard
Hull, John Byres, John Reade, the earl of
Anglesea, and Theophilus Jones. Colonization
of the lands of Muintir Bhaire, for
several reasons, was a hazardous undertaking
and was never attempted. The district west
of Kilcrohane was officially described as
"being all rocky and frequented only by
eagles and birds of prey, never to be
inhabited by reason of rough incommodities."
The O Mahonys remained as
tenants-at-will of their overlords and soon
were lost in obscurity. The chieftains of the
Western Land and their kinsmen of
Kinelmeaky along the valley of the Bandon
river were reduced to beggary. Only two
lines are known of a lament by a poet of
the O Dalys:
O Mahuna an Iarthair, agus Tighearna
Cineal mBeice,
Beirt a bhí i dthighearnais 's anois ag
iarraidh deirce.
O Mahony of the Western Land, and the
Lord of Kinelmeaky,
Both once held lordships, now they are
begging for alms.
The Maccarthys
Sir Bernard Burke has written somewhere
that the Síol Charthaigh or the
MacCarthys were the most venerable
dynastic line in Europe; their origins were
lost in the mists of antiquity. Like the
O Mahonys the MacCarthys were a leading
family of the Eoghanachta of north Munster.
In the early years of the twelfth century,
following the precedent of the O Mahonys,
the MacCarthys migrated southwards from.
Tipperary and penetrated to Kerry and
Cork. The glory in Hiberno-Romanesque
on the rock of Cashel is an enduring
monument to the MacCarthys of north
Munster.
Inevitably, such a resilient and virile race
as the MacCarthys divided itself; the main
branches were the MacCarthys Mór of
Kerry, the MacCarthys Reagh of West
Cork, and the most historic of them all, the
MacCarthys of Muskery or mid-Cork.
Some time after 1185 a sub-division of the
family under Teige Rua moved to the
extreme west of Co. Cork and made
encroachments on the lands of the
O Mahonys. The area thus occupied
comprised part of the eastern end of
Muintir Bhaire and the adjoining parish of
Caheragh. At Scart, some two miles from
Bantry, Teige Rua built a castle, some
remnants of which are still to be seen.
Hence the name of the MacCarthys of
Muintir Bhaire, the line of Teige Rua na
Scairte. Little is recorded of the family
until the closing years of the sixteenth
century when a member of the family,
Teige na Muclach, built a castellated
residence at Cul-na-Long, about a mile
from the modern village of Durrus.
Extensive remains of the castle are still
standing. The unusual sobriquet, Muclach,
is explained by the fact that Teige
maintained a large herd of swine which
foraged for food in the well-wooded hills
of Muintir Bhaire. Teige na Muclach was
a patriarchal figure. The date of his death
is unknown but he was alive in 1602 and
was then aged ninety-seven years. Although
the MacCarthys Muclach gained their lands
at the expense of the O Mahonys, relations
between the families were always cordial,
cemented by many marriages.
In 1602, after the disastrous defeat of the
Irish at Kinsale, the chieftains of the
Western Land shared in the shambles that
Dunmanus Castle, Built A.D. 1430 One Of The Best Preserved Of The O Mahony
Strongholds.
Ruins Of Dunbeacon Castle, An O Mahony Remains Near
Durrus.
Leamcon Castle, Scene Of An O Mahony Rally In Recent Years.
Another Remains Of An O Mahony Family Home, Rosbroin Castle.
Quiet Inlet Of Dunmanus Bay.
Ardintenent Or White Castle, Another Seat Of The
O Mahony Clan.
followed. The Pacata Hibernia lists the
names of some two score O Mahonys,
O Driscolls, and MacCarthys who took
ship for Spain at Ardea on Kenmare bay.
Among them were Teige and Owen
MacCarthy Muclach of Muintir Bhaire,
sons of the patriarchal Teige. Nonetheless,
the family lands were retained. But in 1641
the MacCarthys Muclach were again in the
field. This time the ancestral castle and
lands were granted to a Colonel Reade.
Later the entire property passed to the earls
of Bandon. Scions of the old family
continued to live in humble circumstances
at Dunbeacon. A little headland, near
Dunbeacon castle, today is known as
Muckla point.
Fame of an unenviable kind shone briefly
on another member of the family. About
1790 Father Daniel MacCarthy was
appointed parish priest of Muintir Bhaire.
During his student years in France he had
become imbued with the radical teaching of
Voltaire and Rousseau. In 1793 Father
MacCarthy was charged with the wardship
of Sarah, daughter of Captain Blair, of
Blairs cove, an inlet at the head of Dunnunus
bay. MacCarthy apostatized and
married his ward. Of the union came a
goodly company of distinguished dignitaries
in the Anglican church.
Today, the castle of Cul-na-Long is
slowly tumbling to ruin. Its eerie silence is
broken only by the whispering owls which
nest in its ivy-clad walls.
The O Donovans
Although the name of O Donovan is
preserved in the topography of Muintir
Bhaire the family did not have ancestral
lands in the peninsula. Originally, the
O Donovans were of Eoghanachta stock
like the O Mahonys and the MacCarthys.
During the twelfth century they wrested
lands in West Cork from the O Mahonys
and O Driscolls. Later the O Donovans
fell into three main lines: the Clann Cathail
of Castle Donovan, some three miles north
of Drimoleague, the Clann Lochlainn with
a castle near Glandore, and the Clann
Aineslis which settled in the area corresponding
to the present parishes of
Kilmacabea and Kilmeen. In the confiscaations
of the Cromwellian era the
O Donovans fared badly. Finally, after the
Jacobite wars of 1689-91 they were lost to
history. During the following years when
an O Donovan appeared as occupant of
ancestral lands it was usually at the price of
apostasy. Nevertheless, in the middle years
of the eighteenth century two families of
O Donovans obtained grants of lands in
Muintir Bhaire. At Ardahill, Kilcrohane,
on the approaches to the well-known
Goat's path, an O Donovan of the Clann
Lochlainn, by some legerdemain, received
his land in fee simple. Of his splendid
residence not a trace remains. The family
fell on evil days; two brothers were
inmates of Bantry workhouse in the middle
years of last century. At O Donovan's
cove, midway in the Muintir Bhaire
peninsula, an O Donovan of Clann Cathail,
held land of Congreve, Mount Congreve,
near Waterford. The ruins of his imposing
house may be seen at Fort Lodge. In 1834
Timothy O Donovan presented the site of
the present church at Rosnacahara. Doctor
John O Donovan notes a Richard
O Donovan of this family who entered the
Irish college at Toulouse. Later he entered
the French military service and became a
famous swordsman and duellist. The now
roofless mansion of the O Donovans was
the last refuge and home of Diarmuid
a'Duna MacCarthy with whom died the
famous line of the MacCarthys of Gleannacroim,
near Dunmanway.
The O Dalys
Today there are some thirty-five families
in Muintir Bhaire bearing the name
O Daly or Daly. Indeed the vast majority
of residents in the area can trace an O Daly
Castle Donovan-Three Miles North Of Drimoleague.
ancestry. The ubiquity of the name within
such narrow limits typifies a dinnsheanchus
or lore of the high places that still resists the
impact of modern influences. The O Dalys
of Muintir Bhaire are a visible linkage with
a phase of Irish history that nowadays finds
place only in textbooks.
Who were the O Dalys? In early medieval
times they were grouped in the midlands
in a district now included in Co. Westmeath.
According to family tradition, their ancestor
Dalach, from whom they derive their name,
learned the art of poetry from Saint
Colman mac Lenine of Cloyne, a poet-mystic
of the sixth century. Certainly, the
O Dalys had assured status as a select caste
of professional poets. Of their literary
achievements there can be no question. Any
anthology of Irish poetry of the middle
period will include the work of an O Daly
poet. Hence an O Daly was invariably poet
and remembrancer to the princely families
such as the De Borgoes of Galway, the
O Briens of Thomond, the earls of
Desmond, the MacCarthys Mor of Kerry.
At some date in the thirteenth century an
O Daly was appointed poet and scribe to the
O Mahonys of the Western Land. He was
given four plowlands (480 acres) at
Drumnea and Fearann Meadhonach in the
vicinity of Kilcrohane. Throughout the
vicissitudes of six hundred years the O Daly
tenure is easily recognizable in Muintir
Bhaire.
There are many references in literary
history to the O Daly poets of the Western
Land. Perhaps the best known is Aonghus
O Daly whose name is still a household
word among the bearers of the name and
whose religious lyrics are still sung in the
Interior, Church Of Penal Times At Kealties.
Site Of The O Daly School Of Poetry At Fearann Meadhonach.
parish church of Kilcrohane. His literary
reputation, however, rests mainly on his
satirical poem entitled The Tribes of Ireland.
The work was commissioned by Carew
and Mountjoy, the victors at the battle of
Kinsale, in order to bring discredit on the
Irish ruling families and thus discourage any
further help from Spain. O Daly made a
tour through Ireland testing the hospitality
of the princely houses. With a pen dipped
in gall and venom he vilified his hosts. In
1617 he was stabbed to death at Roscrea,
Co. Tipperary, by an O Meagher whose
family he had traduced. The chief interest
of the satire is its picture of social manners
and customs of the period. O Daly's son,
Aonghus Óg, was also a poet but of much
less literary stature. The remains of the
stone house where they lived may still be
seen at Cora, about two miles to the west
of Kilcrohane.
A contemporary of Aonghus O Daly
was Cornelius O Daly also of Kilcrohane.
He married an heiress of the earl of
Desmond's family and was involved in the
Geraldine wars of 1570-80 and took part in
the attack on Youghal. According to the
State Papers O Daly on the score of his
alliance with the Geraldines laid claim to
the earldom of Desmond. In 1598 he was
again in action in the cause of Hugh
O Neill and with Donal O Sullivan
Beara concerted plans for the defence of
Dunboy. The Pacata Hibernia records an
indictment of O Daly by Carew on the
grounds of seducing Irish troops from the
English service. Apparently, O Daly
escaped to Spain where he died. On
somewhat doubtful grounds he is said to
have been the father of Dominic O Daly,
archbishop of Coimbra in Portugal, who
published the History of the Geraldines in
1650.
Perhaps the most intriguing reminder of
the poetic ethos of the O Dalys of Muintir
Bhaire is the square squat building on the
margin of Fearann Meadhonach lake, once
the bardic school of the O Dalys. Here it is
easy to find composition of place for the
late Robin Flower's description of a
sixteenth-century school of poetry: "While
the schools lasted it was the custom-a
custom of immemorial antiquity-to
compose in the dark. The poets tossing on
their beds (to use Mr. Yeats's phrase in
another connexion) ordered the lines of
their verses and disposed their assonances
and alliterations in a chamber deaf to noise
and blind to light." The stone tower was
the seat and citadel of a civilization that was
a thousand years old. One may reconstruct
the scene when the poets sought inspiration.
A few hundred yards away, on the hillock
at Drumnea, may still be seen the site and
remnants of the residence of the master-poet
of the O Dalys.
There were occasional distractions in the
composition of poetry. In 1641 the
O Mahonys of the Western Land saw their
opportunity to strike back at the despoilers
of their lands and castles-Sir William Hull
and Richard Boyle, earl of Cork. The
grantees had established a flourishing
pilchard curing industry at Dunbeacon and
Dunmanus castles. On a night in December,
1641, there was a hosting of the O Mahonys
-some eight hundred in all-and a descent
was made on the enterprises of Hull and
Boyle. Across Dunmanus bay O Mahonys,
O Dalys and MacCarthys shared in the
attack. In a claim for compensation made
in the following year Hull named the
wreckers from Muintir Bhaire: Daniel
O Daly of Rafferigeen, Cormac O Daly of
Cahir, Teige O Daly of Rosnacahara, and
John MacCarthy Muclach along with a
goodly company of O Mahonys from
Kilcrohane. Among those identified by
Hull was the sprightly widow, Margaret
O Daly, who also had a place in the little
armada that sailed across Dunmanus bay.
He claimed that as result of the raid he had
suffered an annual loss of £l,500-£2,000.
In the Cromwellian regime the O Dalys
Rossmore Castle, North Side Of Dunmanus Bay Near Durrus.
Dun Locha Castle-Three Castles Head.
shared the fate of the vanquished. They were
deprived of their lands in Muintir Bhaire.
According to the Books of Survey and
Distribution among those expropriated
were: Aonghus O Daly of Roskerig,
Donough O Daly of Keenaleene, Teige
O Daly of Reenagcapall, Fineen O Daly of
Ballinatra, Diarmuid O Daly of Cahir,
Aonghus O Daly of Rafferigeen and Gortnakilla. The upheaval brought about a
violent change in the social pattern. The
bardic tradition of poetry died although
members of the O Daly family now sunk
in obscurity continued to write Irish poetry
within living memory. One may add a
significant commentary on Irish agrarian
history: descendants of the dispossessed
occupy their ancestral holdings down to
the present day. The last O Daly who was
acknowledged head of the sept and had right
of burial in the family tomb at Kilcrohane
was James O Daly of Bantry and Carrigtwohill,
Co. Cork. His son, James, died
childless in 1851. An elaborate memorial to
the family has been erected in Kilcrohane
church.
The O Sullivans Of Beara And Muintir
Bhaire
Surely, nature lavished her most extravagant
favours on Bantry bay. The exquisite
harmonies of mountain, lake and sea have
added high romance and colour to the name
O Sullivan Beara. In that delectable corner
of Ireland the dinnsheanchus assumes a
Homeric character. The long headland,
reaching into the Atlantic at the Durseys,
is humped by the line of the Caha
mountains. Amid such scenes history moves
backwards easily to threaten a new
awakening when Donal Cam O Sullivan
Beara will ride forth from Dunboy to take
his place at the head of his shattered clan
and revive past glory. Like grey ghosts the
castles of the O Sullivans still stand sentinel
over his lands: Carriganass on the banks of
the Ouvane, Reendesert at the headwaters
of Bantry bay, Whiddy island, Dunboy at
the mouth of the bay, and Ardea, castle of
the tanist, on the southern shores of
Kenmare bay.
The O Sullivan ancestry is well authenticated.
Oengus, king of Cashel and
contemporary of St. Patrick, died in
A.D. 490. Twelve generations later, in the
tenth century, there was a Suilleabhan, the
patronymic ancestor of the countless
O Sullivans of modern times. Some three
hundred years later there were two
brothers: Giolla Mochuda from whom are
descended the O Sullivans Mór of Kerry,
and Giolla na bhFlann from whom was
descended the clann Labhras or clan
Lawrence. To this branch belong the
O Sullivans of Adrigole and Beare island.
In 1350 Anadh na Leacan O Sullivan,
grandson of Giolla na bhFlann, was the first
to describe himself as lord of Beara. Hence
the O Sullivan settlement in Beara was
relatively late in comparison with the
earlier Eoghanachta migration southwards.
It is not to our purpose to trace the
chequered history of the princes of Beara.
Donal Cam O Sullivan, hero of retreat in
1603, died in Spain in 1618. Two generations
later his line was extinct. Owen
O Sullivan, uncle of Donal Cam, received a
grant of all the lands of Beara. We must
conclude that the O Sullivans who forfeited
the ancestral lands in Muintir Bhaire were
descended from Sir Owen or as he is known
in history, "the Queen's O Sullivan." He
was the uncle of Donal Cam.
After 1641 all was lost. Along the shores
of Muintir Bhaire that form the arm of
Bantry bay south of Whiddy island one can
trace the line of the O Sullivan Beara
forfeitures from Beach to Gearhies. Oddly
enough, not a foot of O Sullivan lands was
included in the Cromwellian debentures.
Instead, in the words of T. D. Sullivan,
"hungry claimants swarmed forth to clutch
the portions of the wreck available to
them." In Muintir Bhaire the dispossessed
were Daniel, Philip, Teige Bui, and the
brothers Ruari and Owen MacFineen
O Sullivan. In every case the new proprietor
was Annesley, earl of Anglesea. He also
obtained the lands of Ardnagashel on the
northern side of Bantry bay. A catalogue of
the hungry claimants in the Beara peninsula
holds the names of William Petty, Wallace,
Gill, Coote, Deane, Phayr, and later, the
Puxleys of Dunboy. In 1662 under the act
of settlement Colonel Daniel O Sullivan of
Ardea castle petitioned for the restoration
of his ancestral lands. In his statement of
claim he recited his services in the Stuart
cause. A royal warrant was actually signed
in favour of his restoration but Petty, who
had acted as surveyor-general under the
Cromwellian scheme of confiscations, was
too powerful. The warrant remained a dead
letter. The O Sullivans disappeared from
history. Some sought refuge in Spain;
others remained as middlemen or humble
cottiers under the new race of landlords.
Muintir Bhaire is tenacious of the
O Sullivan Beara tradition. Children will
indicate at Kilevanoge where Carew's
army embarked in 1602 to lay siege to
Dunboy castle on the opposite shore. A
few miles farther west, at the rocky inlet
of Dooneen, Carew himself took ship.
Ancient remembrancers tell of a sister of
Donal Cam O Sullivan of Dunboy who
found refuge and spent her last years in a
cabin at Gortavallig. In 1857 Ellen of the
Inches, granddaughter of Morty Oge
O Sullivan done to death in 1754, died at
Ardogena house, Durrus, the residence of
her brother-in-law, Florence MacCarthy.
Threads Of History
In any account of the pre-historic, early
Christian, medieval, and early modern
monuments in Muintir Bhaire the centuries
are mere parentheses. Sheep's head is the
modern name of the rocky bastion that bids
defiance to the fury of the Atlantic storms.
The placename is almost certainly a corruption
of an Irish logainm. In the sixth century
Baire, later first bishop of Cork, had his
retreat at Loch Irce, probably to be
identified with Gougane Barra. In the
Beatha Baire or Irish life of Baire is a list of
the saint's disciples; among them were
Cairne, Fintan, and Eothail, all of Ros
Caeraigh. Significantly, Ros Caeraigh or
Roskerig is a place name in Muintir Bhaire.
The verbal substitution of Ros Caorach for
Ros Caeraigh was easy; hence the English
translation Sheep's head (Ros, a promontory,
caora, a sheep). One suspects that
Eothail may have given his name to Ard
Eothaille or Ardahill, near Kilcrohane.
A century after Baire, Cruachan came
from Sneem in south Kerry to set up his
hermitage in Muintir Bhaire. His cill or
cell gave the placename Cill Cruachain or
Kilcrohane. On the site stands a church,
now in ruins, erected during the fourteenth
or early fifteenth century. At Old Durrus,
at the eastern end of the peninsula, stands
another ruined church of the same period.
In the little cemetery is an early Christian
inscribed stone. Cíllíní or cells of early
hermits or ceili De are to be numbered in
scores.
On the main road at Tullig, some two
miles from Ahakista (ath, a ford, ciste, a
treasure) may be seen the broken walls and
tumbled chancel of a penal day Masshouse.
Here lived Father Humphrey O Sullivan.
In 1703, in accordance with the law
requiring the registration of "popish"
priests, he gave biographical details: he was
parish priest of Muintir Bhaire and had
been ordained in Normandy in 1664. We
get another glimpse of him a few years
later. On 9 April, 1714, Father Humphrey
O Sullivan, along with Father Daniel
MacCarthy, parish priest of Schull, Father
Teige MacCarthy, parish priest of
Caheragh, and Father George Gould, parish
priest of Bantry, were indicted at the
general assizes and gaol delivery at Cork.
We lose sight of the four priests in a dismal
scene. A large stone at the entrance to the
shieling that was his home marks the grave
of Father Humphrey O Sullivan. Another
little cameo of history shows the penal
laws at work. In 1708 Thomas Morgan, the
loyal innkeeper at Crookhaven, saw a
French sloop cast anchor under Brow head.
Patrick O Grady, a local boatman, put out
in a small boat and rowed two young men
ashore. The alert Morgan shrewdly
suspected that the arrivals were two young
priests returning from a French college. He
reported to Dublin Castle that the young
men were met by Cian O Mahony from
Muintir Bhaire. Morgan tracked the
travellers to Kilcrohane. When the young
men had rested they set out in the direction
of Cork on horses supplied by O Mahony.
Doubtless, the zealous innkeeper gained his
reward. Although the house of the
hospitable Cian O Mahony is no longer
standing, its site enshrines his name - Cowlakane,
literally, Cabhlach Cein, or the
ruined house of Cian.
"Where Half An Acre's Corn Is Half A
Sheaf "
In 1750, Smith, the historian of Cork,
saw Muintir Bhaire as an "almost barbarous
country where half an acre's corn is half a
sheaf.''
What of the O Mahonys, the O Driscolls,
the O Dalys, the MacCarthys and
O Sullivans? Berkeley, the philosopher-bishop
of Cloyne, gave a classic description
of an Irish cottier's home: "a cave of
poverty, within you see a pot and a little
straw; without a heap of children tumbling
on a dunghill! In every road you meet
ragged ensigns of poverty." And for
sustenance the wretched people knew only
the potato; It was the symbol of ever-threatening starvation. In recent years a
child in the national school in Kilcrohane
caught the tradition of her ancestors:
Prataí ist' oidhche,
Prataí sa ló,
Is da n-eireochainn 'sa mheadhon
oidhche,
Prataí a gheobhainn.
(Potatoes by night, potatoes by day, and if I
were to rise at midnight, potatoes would be my
fare).
It was a shared misery when hospitality
meant a sharing of the potato. So the poet
wrote: "Ba mhaith e an prata, dob fhial is
dob fhairsing e chun e roinnt ar bhochtaibh
De. (The potato was good, generous and
abundant to divide with God's poor). The
theme of social conditions in Muintir Bhaire
in the eighteenth century needs little
enlargement. The ragged ensigns of poverty
groaned under the weight of landlordism
which, in the words of Standish O Grady of
Beara, was as heavy as lead, cold as death,
obsessing the soul of the land! The young
men were passionately alive to the degradation
and indignity that stung their naked
feet and sought relief in the French military
service. One such youth from the Western
Land joined Berwick's Irish regiment in
1780. He was James Swanton and was the
great-grandfather of Hilaire Belloc.
Newenham (View of Ireland, 1809)
estimated that there were 600 houses in
Muintir Bhaire. He noted a rapid increase
in population. The highest annual rent of
holdings was £3. 8. 3. per acre; the lowest
was five shillings for barren land. Any
improvements by the tenant brought an
increase in rent; payment was enforced by
threat of eviction. Evidence presented to
the Devon Commission in l844 reveals the
stark living conditions of the people in the
prefamine years. A labourer earned six
pence a day "without diet"; the only food
was "dry potatoes without kitchen", that is,
without salted fish. There was no milk.
Patrick Tobin, a small holder at Gortavallig
on the southern shore of Bantry bay, stated
that his annual rental was £20-divided
among three or four middlemen. There
were few leases.
Economic stress was aggravated by the
legal imposition and collection of tithes on
Cul Na Long Castle, Durrus.
Store At Friendly Cove, Near Durrus-A Hecatomb During The Famine Years.
behalf of the established church. In 1844,
according to the Cork Post Office Directory
of that year, the total population of the
Durrus-Kilcrohane district, that is, Muintir
Bhaire, was 8,340 of whom some 7,500
were Catholics. The figures appear to be
much too low in view of the high birth
rate later to be noted. The tithe applotment
list of 1830 states that the assessment of the
parish was £720 per annum. The tithes were
divided: one half to the vicar of Durrus;
the other half between Nathaniel Evanson
of Durrus and Alexander O Driscoll,
Shepperton, near Skibbereen, who in turn
paid a moiety to Lord Riversdale and the
earl of Cork to whom the tithes were
impropriate. Thus the tithe-proctors or
collectors, the recipients, and the nobility
were a hierarchy of tax-gatherers that
weighed heavily on a Catholic population
already living in squalor and poverty. The
bailiff and his squad were active agents of
the collectors. Although protests against the
payment of tithes frequently erupted into
violence in many parts of Ireland, there
were few outbreaks in Muintir Bhaire.
Nevertheless, the people flocked to a
monster anti-tithe meeting at Mount
Gabriel on 18 July, 1832.
Catastrophe in 1846-48. For two years
Ireland writhed in the delirium of famine
and famine-typhus. The memory of the
death-sodden years has attached itself to
almost every townland and cross-roads in
Muintir Bhaire. The Bantry Board of
Guardians converted a disused grain store
at Friendly cove to a place of refuge for
children. The derelict building standing on
the water's edge still remains-a grim
mise-en-scene of an Irish hecatomb in which
the victims were the young and comely.
Hardly less fearsome is the panorama of
history in the post-famine years. A team of
proselytizing societies descended upon the
barren and infertile districts where poverty
and distress were the daily instance. One
such society-the Irish Society of London -was
active in the Western Land. These
purveyors of souls interpreted the famine
visitation as a punishment from God on a
wicked people! On 2 May, 1850, the
Marquis of Blandford, president of the Irish
Society, explained the motives of the
proselytisers: "We may reasonably infer
that these judgments are perhaps sent with
this double object in view-not only to
warn the people of their wickedness and
iniquity but at the same time to prepare
their hearts for the reception of those blessed
and eternal truths which it is the privilege
and glory of this society to put before
them," (Irish Intelligence, iii, pp. 70-71). So
fourteen Irish-speaking clergymen, one
hundred and sixteen scripture readers, and
eight hundred teachers advanced on a
tortured people. In Muintir Bhaire proselytizing
schools were established at Knockroe,
Gearhies and Gortalassa. Some of the schools
were in the charge of Irish-speaking
conformists. An indefatigable worker in the
cause was the Irish poet, Seamus O
Suilleabhain, of the Ui Suilleabhain
Fachdnaidh at Bonnane, near Glengarriff.
It was the time of the ''soupers''. The Irish
language has more than one word for soup
but in the context of proselytism the
English word was retained: lucht an tsoup,
literally, the people of the soup.
Regio Depopulata
Irish depopulation in the post-famine era
and the torrent of emigration, especially to
the United States, is a fruitful field of
inquiry for the demographer and economist.
In 1882 Edward Young, chief of the bureau
of statistics at Washington, estimated that
2,721,366 Irish immigrants sought to make
their homes in the United States between
the years 1846-75. More modern investigations
would increase the figure.
No data exists which would allow an
estimate of the flight from Muintir Bhaire.
The "Dealy", a vessel of four hundred tons
sailed regularly from Bantry to St. John's,
New Brunswick. No records have survived
to tell us how many sailed in her to find
happiness in the new world. In later years
emigration from Muintir Bhaire was
directed to Wyoming. Jeremiah O Mahony
an emigrant from Kilcrohane, fought in the
federal army during the American civil
war. When peace was established he settled
as a sheep farmer in the state of Wyon1ing.
He sponsored the immigration of hundreds
from his native Muintir Bhaire. Many of
the Irish emigrants won prominence in
public life. Patrick O Sullivan of Eskeraha
represented Wyoming in the United States
senate.
The most objective evidence of the effect
of emigration on Muintir Bhaire in postfamine
times is found in the parish registers.
To give a complete picture we have
compiled the statistics for marriages and
baptisms during two periods: 1833-55 and
1955-70.
Marriages Baptisms
1833 70 328
1834 62 340
1835 70 298
1836 53 318
1837 57 324
1838 89 275
1839 57 328
1840 66 275
1841 60 329
1842 48 317
1843 63 298
1844 60 376
1845 72 312
1846 69 344
1847 19 56
1848 16 134
1849 12 116
1850 22 107
1851 21 121
1852 20 110
1853 20 117
1854 40 130
1855 31 120
1955 5 21
1956 7 27
1957 2 29
1958 3 17
1959 4 18
1960 3 24
1961 5 15
1962 6 17
1963 5 19
1964 4 22
1965 4 16
1966 7 16
1967 3 20
1968 2 21
1969 3 22
1970 5 19
An immediate result of the sharp decline
in the marriage and birth rates has been the
closure of primary schools. In 1966 there
were five national or primary schools.
Because of vanishing enrolment the schools
at Gortalassa and Galladoo on the southern
shore of Bantry bay have been closed. The
closure of the school at Rosnacahara has
been decided by the department of
education. Thus there will be only two
schools in the peninsula in the near future.
The present population is approximately
l,200 most of whom are in the ageing
groups. Very noticeable is the absence of
girls of marriageable age.
Yet there are happy auguries. A rural
industry in Kilcrohane has attracted much
attention in recent years. Climatic
conditions are favourable to horticulture,
especially to the growing of spring flowers.
In 1964 local initiative asserted itself. A
co-operative society, comprising eight
shareholders, was formed to engage in
intensive flower growing. With the aid of
a grant from the Department of Agriculture
and loans from the Agricultural Credit
Corporation and the Dochas organisation
the project has expanded to a flourishing
industry. At the present time there are
more than fifty shareholders. The necessary
plant, premises and equipment have been
purchased; the area under cultivation has
been increased annually. Continuous effort
is made to meet the enormous demand in
Irish and British markets for spring flowers
and other horticultural produce. The
balance sheet of the society for l969 shows
that the gross takings were some £800
weekly. In 1970 the gross turnover was
£10,000. It may well be that rural cooperative
planning and local enterprise
will assure a happy future for Muintir
Bhaire.
In the unfolding of time the bright
battalions of youth may return to add new
chapters to a stirring history.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
H. V. Morton, In Search of Irela11d, London, 1930.
Scientific Proceedings of the Royal Dublin Society, vol. 2, 1964.
Annals of Inisfallen.
Annals of the Four Masters.
Butler, Gleanings from Irish History, London, 1925.
Brady, Clerical Records of Cork, Cloyne & Ross, Dublin, 1863.
Books of Survey and Distribution (1657).
Bagenal, The American Irish, London, 1882.
Corkery, The Hidden Ireland, Dublin, 1924.
Daly, The O Dalys of Muintiravara, Dublin, 1905.
Burke, Irish Priests in the Penal Times, Waterford, 1914.
Flower, The Irish Tradition, Oxford, 1947.
Holland, History of West Cork and the Diocese of Ross, Skibbereen, 1949.
Leabhar MacCarthaigh in Miscellaneous Irish Annals, ed. O h-Innse, 1947.
Leabhar Muimlmeach, ed. Tórna, Dublin, 1940.
MacCarthy, A History of the MacCarthys of Munster, Dundalk, 1922.
Newenham, View of Ireland, Dublin, 1809.
CJ Daly, The Tribes of Ireland, ed. O'Duffy in Cath. Bulletin, vol. 21, 1931.
O Dalaigh Aonghus, Poems of, ed. M'Kenna, Dublin, 1919.
O Dalys, a History of, O Daly, New York, 1937.
O'Mahony, A History of the O'Mahony Septs, Cork, 1912.
O'Mahony, West Cork and its Story, Tralee, 1961.
O'Halloran, History of West Cork, Dublin, 1916.
O'Sullivan, Historiae Catholicae Iberniae Compendium, ed. Kelly, Dublin, 1850.
O Riain, Seamus O Suilleabhain in Studia Hibernica, no. 8, 1968.
Pacata Hibernia, ed. 1810.
Tithe Applotment Lists 1830.
Smith, A History of Cork, ed. 1893.
Townsend, General and Statistical Survey of the County of Cork, Cork, 1815.
Walsh, Spanish Knights of Irish Origin, Dublin, 1960.
Wakefield, An Account of Irela11d, Political and Statistical, London, 1812.
Parish Registers of Muintir Ilhaire &c., &c.
