The title, Church of England, is even less relevant today than it was in past centuries as an
expression of a coherent and consistent body of religious beliefs held by the majority of the
English-speaking people. It never embraced Scotland, which retained her own national
system of Presbyterianism. Even after the Union of Scotland and England in 1707, the
Presbyterian Church of Scotland was recognised and safeguarded as the Scottish national
Church. Wales and Ireland had a different history. When Wales became legally incorporated
and united with England in 1536, it came under the jurisdiction of the Church of England.
It remained so until 1920 when the Anglican Church of Wales was disestablished and
became a voluntary society, under the title of "The Church of Wales". . .
Since 1920, therefore; the Church of England is a Church of England only, limited to
England, but controlled by a State not limited to England and includes in its Parliament
representatives of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. 
Until the Act of Union in 1800, Ireland had a separate Protestant Church of Ireland.
After the forced political union of the countries the Church of Ireland, incorporated and
united with the Church of England, became known as the United Church of England and
Ireland. The title was an obvious anomaly and an insult to an overwhelmingly Catholic
country. 
Some liberal Englishmen and writers had protested against the Penal Laws, and the
injustice of taxing a people to support a religion to which they did not belong. Long before
the Disestablishment Act of 1869 was passed, Macaulay made a memorable and little-known
speech in the House' of Commons (23 April, 1845) condemning the Established Church of
Ireland. I quote from his Speeches (p. 181 f):
"Of all the institutions in the civilised
world the Established Church of Ireland
seems to me the most absurd. The world is
full of ecclesiastical establishments but
nowhere the Church of a small minority
enjoying exclusive establishment." This
Established Church, "after two hundred and
eighty years (1560-1845), has little to show"
despite all the money lavished on it. "What
but the most zealous Roman Catholic
population on the face of the earth. It is
where it was two hundred years ago ....
There you are still, not victorious over the
domain of the old faith, but painfully and
with dubious success defending your own
frontier, your own English pale. On the
great mass of the Catholic population you
have made no impression whatever. There
they are ten to one against the members of
your Established Church".
The same Macaulay, writing in the
Edinburgh Review (No. 88), said of the
Reformation in England that it "sprung
from brutal passion", was "nurtured by
selfish policy", and displayed little of what
had, in other countries, distinguished it,
unsparing devotion, boldness of speech, and
singleness of eye".
When Gladstone became prime minister
in 1869, backed by a large Liberal majority,
he carried a Bill which disestablished, and
partially disendowed, the Church of Ireland.
It is difficult to determine the precise
extent to which the Church of England is a
State-controlled Church. Theory and
practice do not always coincide. Life is
larger than logic and law. In law the
English sovereign appoints the prelates on
the advice of the prime minister. Its ritual
and doctrine are under the final control of
the Houses of Parliament, which can allow
or disallow changes. The final jurisdiction
over it is vested in a State tribunal known as
the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council.
In his book, Britain and the British People,
(Oxford U. Press, 1942, p. 93) Ernest
Barker wrote: "The Church of England,
with the new National Assembly which it
acquired in 1920, is in its actual spirit and
action a national rather than a State
Church". How much out of touch with
the realities of the situation the description
"national Church" is today appears evident
from the recent Report of a Commission
on the relations between the Church of
England and the State. The Report was
published in December, 1970, and is the
fifth in this century dealing with Church-State
problems.
The Majority Report seems to suggest
that England as a whole is unchristian if one
relies merely on the criterion of Church
attendance. It is thought that there are about
four million practising Christians in
England, arid that only half of them are
Anglicans. Miss Valerie Pitt, who leads the
Minority Report, thinks that a great many
of the twenty-five million or so who call
themselves Church of England "mistake a
culture for a faith", forgetting that
Christianity is a revealed religion,
demanding an active and personal assent.
The editor of The Sunday Times (13 Dec.,
1970) summarising the findings of the
Commission stated that the new Report
"stops well short of advocating English
disestablishment". A majority of the Commission
recommend less recourse to
Parliament regarding business matters, and
none at all as to worship and doctrine. They
would leave the choice of bishops with
Downing Street, but would give the
Church a greater voice there. The editor
thinks that the arguments for disestablishment
"deserve to prevail". Separation from
the State would remove many Non-conformist
objections to Protestant reunion.
"If it unfairly lost its endowments in the
process, it would also lose the enormous
burden of maintaining its unwanted
buildings". In the event of disestablishment
many Anglicans would like to keep the
sovereign as supreme governor of the
Church or at least its patron or guardian.
During the next three years the Church of
England authorities and "interested laymen",
including the prime minister, are
expected to reach a decision on the complex
problems involved in any great departure
from British Church tradition. Doctor
Michael Ramsey, Archbishop of Canterbury,
made an important statement in an
interview with John Heilpern reported in
The Observer, 18 April, 1971:
''I'd like to change the Church-State
relationship, particularly in the transference
of power over the control of doctrine and
worship from Parliament to the Church. If
we could wake up next week and find the
Church disestablished, I should be glad".
Early Opposition To An Established
Church
During, and particularly after, the reign
of Queen Elizabeth I, there was a growing
demand to alter the existing ecclesiastical
system of the Church of England or at least
to obtain greater freedom or toleration for
the numerous splinter Churches and
dissident Christians. Elizabeth's attempt to
settle "the national religion" met with
opposition. She wanted to retain "as much
of the Catholic rites as might be decorous
in the new religion", and by doing so unite
her people. John Knox said of her that "she
was neither good Protestant nor yet
resolute Papist; let the world judge which
is the third".
A party arose who were intent on
reforming the Reformation. "In their
attempt at more than human purity, they
obtained the nickname, Puritans, and from
their fastidiousness about very small matters,
Precisians." Drayton described them as a
class of persons that "for a painted glass
window would pull down the whole
Church". Fuller wished to abandon the
term and substitute for it Nonconformists.
But "the fury of this party under Charles I's
reign made the ironical appellative survive"
-(quoted in Isac d'Israeli, Curiosities of
Literature, 1867 edn, p. 410).
Indeed, books were published as early as
1605 with titles such as The Picture of a
Puritan by Oliver Omerod, denouncing
those who wanted to alter the existing ecclesiastical
system of the Church of England.
"These groaners dislike not only the Church
of Rome but the Church of England", and
their numbers are "increasing daily".
London, the main centre of Puritanism and
the seat of financial power, played a
decisive part in the downfall of Charles I
and Cromwell's rise to power.
Reviewing the causes of "the feuds and
divisions" of the seventeenth century,
Richard Harley in l710 ascribed the chief
cause to "the fact that the clergy since the
Reformation were no longer on the popular
side". The establishment of a State Church
"led men of aspiring tempers to flatter
princes by exaggerating their powers
whereas in the times of Papery ... the
clergy were then as zealous as the
temporality in defending the liberties of the
people against the usurpations of the
Crown". (Faults on both Sides printed in
Somers Tracts, Vol. II, p. 48).
Discontent with the Established Church
was mounting after the restoration of the
Monarchy under Charles II. Henry Nevile,
a liberal-minded Puritan, referred in 1681
"to the little credit the Church of England
hath amongst the people, most men being
almost as angry with that Papery which is
left amongst us as they are with those
dogmas that are abolished" -(Plato
Redivivus, p. 88).
After Cromwell's death in 1658 all
parties co-operated in the restoration of the
Monarchy. Charles II, however, felt very
insecure. The Restoration, as Chesterton
said, did not really restore, because Charles
was never in the old sense a king. He was
"a leader of the opposition to his own
ministers". He was, as Evelyn said in his
Diary, "restored by the very army which
rebelled against him".
Shortly after the Restoration he issued a
remarkable proclamation against "vicious,
debauched and profane persons; a sort of
men of which we are ashamed, who spend
their time in taverns, tippling houses giving
no other evidence of their affection for us
but in drinking our health, and who, in
truth have discredited our cause by the
licence of their manners and lives". This
proclamation, d'Israeli remarked, was
probably dictated by "the moral severity"
of his minister, Clarendon, and must have
"amused the gay debauched circle, the
loose cronies of royalty". The reign of
Charles II was under the domain of French
fashions, and with regard to dress and
manners they were rather novel and
sensational, at least compared with those of
previous ages in English history.
The proclamation printed in d'Israeli's
Curiosities of Literature, 1867 edn, p. 515,
also contained a strong plea for the strict
observance of Lent "for the good it
produces in the employment of fishermen".
This economic argument in favour of the
retention of Lenten regulations is even
relevant today.
Charles II was dominated by Clarendon
for many years. Finally Charles was so
annoyed by Clarendon's opposition to the
toleration of religious Dissenters that he
allowed him to go in to exile. In 1669
Charles declared his intention of becoming
a Roman Catholic, and in 1685 his brother
the future ill-fated James II, arranged to
have a priest attend him before he died.
Two years after the Restoration, the Act of
Uniformity was passed compelling every
Englishman to belong to the Anglican
Church. This Act shattered the hopes of all
Nonconformists who tried to reform the
State Church by making it more Protestant,
and had co-operated in the restoration of
the Monarchy with that end in view.
Charles's brother, James, was appointed
Lord High Admiral of the Navy, and
displayed great ability and courage in the
second and third Dutch wars. His reception
into the Catholic Church about 1670 made
the holding of this office impossible after
the Test Act of 1673.
Religious Tensions After Royal Takeover
Of William Of Orange
The accession of a Roman Catholic
monarch to the throne was bound to
precipitate a political and religious crisis.
James did little to ward it off His indiscretion
in ridding prominent Anglicans
from. offices in the State, followed by the
Royal Declaration of Indulgence in April,
1687, suspending the laws against Roman
Catholics and Nonconformists, sealed his
fate. His marriage, after his wife's death, to
Mary of Modena, a zealous Catholic, gave
rise to grave fears as to his successor in the
event of children being born of this union.
Public opinion was alarmed and there arose
a frenzy of fear culminating in the "Popish
Plot" scare.
In 1688 William III of Orange, who was
married to Mary, the elder daughter of
James by his first wife, was approached by a
prominent group of Englishmen and
requested to take over the English
Monarchy. In later years Thomas Paine in
his reply to Burke's Reflections on the
French Revolution made the following
cynical commentary on this royal take-over.
"If Government be what Mr. Burke
describes it a contrivance of human wisdom.,
I might ask him, if wisdom was at such a
low ebb in England, that it was become
necessary to import it from Holland and
from Hanover ... That was not the case;
and if it was, it mistook the cargo". (The
Rights of Man, Everymans Library, 1935,
p. 112).
In 1689, William III, anxious to reduce
religious tensions and grievances, passed the
so-called Toleration Act. This Act excluded
Roman Catholics and Unitarians. It did
little to improve the position of Nonconformists
of varying shades of opinion.
The Act merely granted them permission
to absent themselves from the services of
the Anglican Church provided they took
an oath of allegiance to the king; signed a
declaration against Papery and conducted
their services behind closed doors.
Nonconformists or Dissenters were
further penalised because they were denied
full civil-rights. They were regarded as
"half-citizens", and subjected to a triple
body of religious disabilities or discriminations.
They could not hold municipal office
by an Act passed in 1661 known as the
Corporation Act. They could not hold any
military office in the State. Their sons were
debarred from attending the Universities of
Oxford and Cambridge. These disabilities
were not removed until 1828, and it was
only in l871 that they were fully admitted
on terms of equality to Oxford and
Cambridge. (Ernest Barker, op. cit.,
pp. 86-7).
Despite these handicaps the Nonconformists
exercised a profound influence
on English life in many directions. The
indifference to life which seems inherent in
a strict interpretation of the Calvinist
dogma of predestination was counteracted
by the practical optimism of the British
character. The British remained a self-confident
people convinced of their
providential destiny to shape the world of
human affairs. If life to the Calvinist
Protestant appeared a solitary pilgrimage
and religion basically a matter between
one's own soul and God, he never regarded
heaven as a place "peopled by earthly
failures". Indeed, material success tended to
be considered as the sign or badge of
divine election. This form of "Protestant
asceticism", as Christopher Dawson styled
it, gave rise to a "new social type in
English life, who regarded their work as a
kind of religious vocation. It was men of
this type who supplied the driving power
of the Industrial Revolution, and were the
founders of the economic power of Britain
and the United States." (Progress and
Religion, 1929, p. 204).
In the seventeenth century Puritan writers
were asserting that there was an "inherent
inaptitude" in Catholicism for business
success, forgetting the historic fact that
mediaeval Italian Catholics were the
economic and financial schoolmasters of
Europe. It is more correct to say that some
Catholic authors over-emphasised the
dangers of avarice and covetousness and
this inhibited some people from making the
best use of this world. At all times religion
has played an important role in the
economic and political life of mankind. For
centuries the division of political parties in
England was based on religion, the Tories
belonging to the Anglican Church and the
Whigs to the Nonconformist Churches.
How untrue the Marxian view is that
economic factors alone give us the key to
history.
We have noted the limited nature of the
Toleration Act passed by William III after
his accession to the throne in 1689. His
attem.pt to carry a Comprehension Bill
designed to attract Dissenters to the
Anglican Church failed completely. The
Act requiring all holders of office in Church
and State to take the oaths of supremacy
and allegiance met with opposition in
unexpected quarters and within the bosom
of the Anglican Church. Most of those who
refused to recognise the new sovereign as
the lawful king and head of the Church of
England were motivated by political
reasons, the desire to maintain the Stuart
succession. There were others who, at least
by their writings, favoured the separation of
the two authorities, that of Church and
State.
Foremost amongst these was Jeremy
Collier (1650-1726), Anglican clergyman
and ecclesiastical historian, who has not
received the attention he deserves and still
awaits his biographer. He belonged to a
group of about four hundred beneficed
clergymen, who with William Sancroft,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and six other
bishops refused to take the oath of allegiance.
They are known as "Nonjurors". Gilbert
Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury, tried to
persuade them to accept the new order, and
failed. In February, 1690, they were
deprived of their sees and benefices.
Sancroft and his followers requested
James II, who was in exile, to nominate
two bishops to carry on the episcopal
succession. George Hickes and Thomas
Wagstaffe were consecrated in 1694. In
1713 another consecration took place when
George Hickes consecrated Jeremy Collier,
and two others, as "bishops at large". The
Nonjurors claimed that they represented
the true Church of England although only
a minority.
It is interesting to note that Collier for
his consecration ceremonies opted for the
l 549 version of the Book of Common Prayer
because later editions omitted what he
considered important petitions and practices.
He wrote a few tracts such as "Reasons for
Restoring some Prayers" in 1717 to justify his
liturgical views. This gave rise to controversy
and led to disunion or "schism" in
the "Nonjuring" ranks in 1718. The
introduction of a new communion office
containing some "usages" taken from the
primitive liturgies caused a division for
some years. In 1731 both parties accepted
the changes. The new "usages" in the
Communion service included prayers for
the faithful departed, prayers for the descent
of the Holy Ghost on the consecrated
elements; the mixed chalice, the oblatory
prayer, offering the elements to the Father
as symbols of His Son's Body and Blood.
Other dissensions arose later in the
century and in 1805 the Episcopal succession
of the "Nonjuring" community ended with
the death of Bishop Charles Booth in 1805.
Since their inception on Whit Sunday,
l691, after a "farewell celebration of Holy
Communion" for Archbishop Sancroft
held in the chapel of Lambeth Palace, they
had to conduct their religious services in
many meeting places, often in private
houses.
The terms "Nonjurors" and “Jacobites"
are not convertible. Many Jacobites -those
who favoured the Stuart succession - remained
in the Anglican Church, whereas
the "Nonjurors", while favouring the
Stuart cause, refused to recognise the
State-Church.
The "Nonjurors" position in the
ecclesiastical history of England seems
rather anomalous or illogical. They claimed
that they represented the true Protestant
pre-Revolution (1688) Church. That
Church, however, recognised State control.
The truth is that they were seeking greater
autonomy or less interference on the part of
the State in Church affairs. "They were",
as H. Broxap has said, "essentially opposed
to the theory, which, as a matter of fact,
was carried into effect by successive
governments in the eighteenth century,
namely, that the Church was a department
of the civil service of the State." (Social and
Political Ideas of some English Thinkers of the
Augustan Age. Edited by Hearnshaw, 1928,
pp. 109-11). They were the precursors of
the modern Church of England, and maybe
of a Disestablished Church in the future.
They claimed to have "retained the
Catholic Anglican heritage, in which the
State could have neither part nor lot to
confer or deprive". (Norman Sykes, in
Hearnshaw, op. cit., p. 141). In 1927 the
Anglican bishops in their revised liturgy
abandoned the earlier liturgy of Cranmer
contained in the first Prayer Book of
Edward VI. In all essentials, they have as
H. Broxap has noted, "copied what was
first introduced by their irregular predecessors
in the Nonjurors' new Communion
office of 1718".
It is relevant to refer briefly to the
variations which have taken place in the
Liturgy of the Anglican Church since the
first Communion Service drawn up by
Cranmer, Ridley, and other Protestant
bishops in the reign of Edward VI, and
published in 1549. That Liturgy clearly
expresses the doctrine of the real presence
of Christ in the Eucharist, or as it was then
called, the Supper of the Lord. It stated that
"the whole body of Christ is received under
each particle of the Sacrament". (Burnet,
History of the Reformation, part 2, book I).
Afterwards when "the Calvinist party
prevailed", as Doctor John Milner pointed
out in his book, The End of Controversy,
1818, (p. 227 note), the 29th Article of the
42 Articles of Religion drawn up by the
same prelates and published in 1552,
expressly denied the real presence of Christ
in the Eucharist. When Queen Elizabeth
came to the throne, the 42 Articles of
Religion were reduced to 39. The Common
Prayer Book issued by her omitted the
declaration against the real presence with
a view to pleasing or not offending those
who believed in it. So also was the former
rubric omitted, which explained that "by
kneeling at the sacrament no adoration was
intended to any corporal presence of
Christ's natural flesh and blood". Thus the
Liturgy stood for a hundred years. But in
l662, in the reign of Charles II, the old
rubric against the real presence and the
adoration of the sacrament was again
restored, and so it has remained.
An excellent account of the changes in
the Anglican Liturgies is given in the fifth
chapter of The Reverend W. Waterworth,
S.J., Origins and Developments of Anglicanism,
published in London in l854.
Doctor Milner in the book already
mentioned, pointed out the ambiguity and
inconsistency of the authorised Catechism of
the Anglican Church regarding the doctrine
of the real presence. At one point the
Catechism declares that "the body and blood
of Christ are verily and indeed taken and
received by the faithful in the Lord's
Supper, and at a later stage the Catechism
confesses that what one receives is merely
bread and wine in memory of Christ's
passion and death. There the ambiguity and
uncertainty still remain.
The first Article of Henry VIII's Six
Articles of Religion proclaimed the doctrine
of the Real Presence. "In the Sacrament of
the Altar, after the Consecration, there
remains no substance of bread and wine;
but under these forms the natural body and
blood of Christ are present." Article V
states "Private Masses ought to be
continued; which as they are agreeable to
God's law, so men receive great benefit
from them". In his will Henry left money
for the celebration of Masses in perpetuity
for the repose of his soul. These facts are not
generally known and the recent popular
film dealing with his life-as far as I know - did
not mention them. Article III would
make clerical celibacy a divine rather than
an ecclesiastical law! "Priests may not
marry by the law of God." The 31st Article
of Edward VI's 42 Articles stated that
"bishops, priests, and deacons are not
commanded by God's law, either to avow
the estate of single life, or to abstain from
marriage".
The level of theological knowledge
displayed in the Articles of religion of
Henry VIII, Edward VI and Elizabeth was
very low. It is curious that some leading
Calvinists in the past have admitted that the
Catholic doctrine of the real presence is
"far more conformable to Scripture than
the Lutheran". (Doctor Milner, op. cit.,
p. 226). Those who refuse to accept this
"hard saying" of the Gospel, the mystery
of the real presence of Christ in the
Eucharist (mysterium fidei), unwittingly set
limits to the power and love of God both
of which are infinite.
The divergence of opinion which exists
to-day amongst Anglican clergy as to what
precisely they understand as the doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Eucharist is
evident from letters which have appeared
in The Universe (May 7 and May 21, 1971).
Canon H. S. Box, Saint Barnabas Vicarage,
Bexil-on-Sea, minimises the doctrinal
differences between the Roman Catholic
and the Anglican teaching. The Reverend
M. L. Stevens, a fellow Anglican, (The
Universe, May 21) disagrees with Canon
Box's interpretation of the Catechism for
Anglican teaching on the Eucharist which,
he thinks, must be interpreted in the light
of Article 28 of the Thirty-Nine Articles.
This Article states that "The Body of
Christ is given, taken and eaten, only after
a heavenly and spiritual manner. And the
means , whereby the Body of Christ is
received and eaten in the Supper is Faith".
The confusion which exists to-day is
clearly indicated in a letter by a former
Anglican curate, William H. Thomas, in
the May, 7, 1971 issue of The Universe.
"There are certainly many Anglicans who
do believe the doctrines of the Real
Presence, transubstantiation and the sacrifice
of the Mass. Until I was received into the
Church in l933, I was an Anglican curate
believing all these things. Experience,
however, suggests that such is not the case
with most Anglicans, or with authoritative
Anglicanism. Bound up with this question
is that of Holy Orders. I have many good
Anglican friends but that does not enable
me to look upon their clergy as priests".
One is tempted to think that a statement
by Benjamin Hoadley, Bishop of Bangor,
in 1719, is still very relevant to the Anglican
Church. Any attempt to interfere with one's
"Christian liberty to interpret the Bible
as one pleases" is not only contrary to the
true principles of the Reformation, but
actually "a form of Protestant Papery".
(The Common Rights of subjects defended,
1719, p. 138). The same bishop protested in
this book (p. 259) against the exclusion of
men from their "civil rights" solely on
account of differences in religion-a very
pertinent observation even in this century.
PART II
Social And Economic Repercussions - Radicalism
Of The Rich
Jeremy Collier's claims to be remembered
are not limited to his role in bringing about
liturgical reforms in the Church of England.
His political activities after the occupation
of the English throne by William of
Orange, his literary output, and particularly
his critical attitude towards the trend of
tastes and values following the Reformation,
deserve notice.
He was sent to prison for writing a tract
in favour of the Stuart King James II. The
tract entitled The Desertion discussed in a
Letter to a Country Gentleman, in 1688 was a
reply to Bishop Burnet's defence of King
William's accession to the throne. After
some months in Newgate prison he was
released without trial. He was interned
again in 1692 on suspicion of being in
treasonable correspondence with James II,
but his internment was of short duration.
He was outlawed, and compelled to "go on
the run" for granting pardon on the scaffold
to Sir John Friend and Sir William Parkyns,
who tried to assassinate King William.
He often signed himself J. Smith to
prevent his correspondence being traced to
himself. When law and order was restored
he returned to London after a year's
absence. His literary output and interests
were considerable.
The first volume of Essays upon Several
Moral Subjects appeared in 1697, and was
followed by two more in 1705 and 1709.
The essay on "The office of Chaplain" was
a spirited protest against the existing
subserviency of many of the stipendiary
clergy. Although the Essays were written
in dialogue form and thus irritating, his
own views or convictions are clear enough.
He was strongly opposed to a State-paid
clergy, and thought that "the main ground
of the contempt of the clergy in England
was due to the fact that one part of them.
grew cheap by their poverty and the other
by their covetousness" . Money is not
always an index of "power and reputation"
and sometimes "abridges rather than
enlarges a man's liberty by receiving it".
(op. cit., part 1, p. 47).
He dealt with "the usual steps to honour"
in the Essay on Pride and reduced them to
learning, commerce and arms. He seems to
frown on trade and commerce as leading to
"a narrowness of spirit". The dangers
attached to the acquisition of wealth, and
the abuses to which its possession may lead,
are discussed and he concludes that it is not
the possession of any valuable advantage
but "the right management" of it that
makes a man "considerable". One who
does not employ his fortune generously is
not entitled to respect. He seems to favour
"sumptuary laws" or restrictions on the
purchase of luxuries. In the absence of such
legislation ''everyone has the liberty of
being as expensive and modish as he
pleases". There is a puritanical tone about
this admonition or a warning against the
tendency to equate civilization with the
multiplication of man's material wants, and
the means he has of satisfying them.
Collier devoted twenty years of his life
to the production of two major works:
(r) Great Historical, Geographical, Genealogical
and Poetical Dictionary, based on, and
partly translated from, a Dictionary by
Louis Moréris; and (2) Ecclesiastical History
of Great Britain to the end of Charles II' s
reign. It is possible that these books provide
material for a research degree.
The Essays on Moral Subjects (part l, p. 2I)
contain observations worth noting in this
age which questions the need for religion
and denies the validity and universality of
an objective moral law. He found many
"refined understandings ... defective in
their skill about moral truths: (excepting
those taught by revelation, which supernatural
discoveries the unlearned are capable
of understanding as far as their happiness is
concerned)". The truth in this clumsy
sentence is more clearly expressed by
Philalethes in the dialogue: "One would
almost think that right and wrong lay
rather in the fancies of men than in the
reason of things; and was bounded more
by seas and rivers than by any unalterable
limits of nature; that virtue and vice were
minted by the civil magistrate and, like
coins, would pass for currency only in his
own dominions."
His book on the Immorality and Profaness
of the English Stage (1698) aroused the
indignation of the dramatists, and led to
replies from men like Dryden, Congreve
and others. It is possible that he exaggerated
the influence of the stage alone in bringing
about the decline in public morality. The
drama was often used as an instrument to
ridicule the things which people in the past
regarded as serious and sacred. Bishop
Berkeley, in 1721, in the Essay towards
preventing the Ruin of Great Britain, thought
so. For about ten years Collier replied to
his critics in numerous tracts. One of those
whom Collier severely criticised was
Captain John Vanbrugh (1672-1726) whose
plays and comedies were coarse, and he was
one of "the favourites of the town".
The reaction against Puritan austerity
which set in after the Restoration of
Charles II, tended to debase the tastes and
manners of the people. A new era in the
history of England's drinking habits
emerged. Hard drinking became more
closely associated with loyalty to the king.
"Drinking the king's health", wrote Burnet
in his Life of Sir Mathew Hale, was "set up
by too many as a distinguishing mark of
loyalty and drew many into great excesses".
In a book entitled New State of England
(1693) Guy Miege, a Dutch refugee,
regretted that he "could not clear the
English from wantonness and debauchery"
as he had from "cruelty". Although they
observed but "few holydays" he wished
that these were kept with "more devotion
and less intemperance". Hard hitting for a
Protestant and a refugee! In 1647, John
Cooke, a lawyer, ascribed the growth of
intemperance in England to the
Reformation. "It is a sad observation", he
wrote in Unum Necessarium or, the Poor
Afan's Advocate that drunkards came not
into this kingdom till the Reformation, and
a sadder observation which I found true
that Protestants generally are greater
drinkers than Papists". Camden, however,
in his History of Queen Elizabeth, attributed
the evil to England's long wars in the
Netherlands when "the English first learnt
to drown themselves with immoderate
drinking". Hard drinking was for a long
time-some think it lasted two centuries - one
of England's "national vices". It was a
"borrowed folly", and England is indebted
to the Danes for many of its terms of
jollity, such as rouse and carouse. (I. d'Israeli,
Curiosities of Literature, p. 285).
Camden, writing of the seventeenth
century, said that the "vice had so diffused
itself over the whole nation" that it had to
be "restrained by severe laws". Many
statutes against drunkenness, by way of
prevention, were passed in the reign of
James I. A very interesting fact, in view of
present-day practice in the law courts, is
that English law in the eighteenth century
regarded drunkenness as an aggravation of
any offence committed, not an excuse for
criminal behaviour. (Blackstone, Commentaries
on the Laws of England, book IV,
chap. 2).
Benjamin Franklin in his Life written by
himself, who as a young man worked as a
pressman at Watts printing house in
London, relates how shocked he was by the
drinking habits of his fellow workmen.
Being a Puritan and of Puritan descent he
was easily scandalized, and was called "the
American Aquatic" by his fellow workers.
Father John Weldon, an Irish Capuchin
doing missionary work in London,
regretted that "women sat up late at night
and drank as much as men". (The Divine
Pedagogue, Lond., 1692, p. 178). A twentieth-century
reaction to this statement would
be to ask how did he arrive at this
generalization.
The growth of intemperance amongst
the English working classes or poorer
members of society was partly due to the
abolition of ecclesiastical holydays and
guild festivals after the Reformation, and to
the Puritan's policy of taking all recreation
out of Sundays. The passive acceptance by
the poor of England of a religious
revolution, which deprived them of so
many social benefits and days of leisure, is
one of the paradoxes of history. "The
Reformation robbed the lower classes of
the institutions which had helped them in
their time of need", and an undemocratic
parliamentary government "produced a
class domination which took their land
from them". These facts are stressed by
William Hasbach in his great work, A
History of the English Labourer, (1908, p. 70).
What is known as "the enclosure movement"
in the eighteenth century was, when
completed, little short of a social revolution.
It involved the disappearance of many
small tenant land-holders in the interest of
capitalist or large-scale farming, which most
economic historians regard as inevitable and
just an incident in economic progress.
Agricultural reorganisation was a necessity,
but it need not have involved so many
hardships to the poorer land-holders. G. M.
Trevelyan, the most optimistic of English
social historians, regretted this "radicalism
of the rich", which was "often at the
expense of the poor". (English Social
History, 1947, p. 376).
Many landless labourers, deprived of
their livelihood by the Enclosure Acts,
drifted into the towns and cities. In
desperation they frequently had recourse to
theft or "nibbling" at the property of their
more privileged citizens.
Bernard de Mandeville, a doctor of
Dutch extraction resident in England, a man
of wide philosophical and literary interests,
noted in 1725 that the hardships which the
"landed gentlemen" had inflicted on the
poor was aggravated by "the oppression
practised" by traders and employers. He
refers to the practice of "paying the poor
labourer in bread, cloth, etc., instead of
money". He regretted that the humane
statute passed in the reign of Queen Anne
prohibiting such practices was never
executed or observed. He instanced the case
of "a poor weaver who protested against
this method of payment", after the statute
was passed. The weaver "got a warrant for
his master and forced him to pay him in
money". By doing so he was sacked, and
all other "masters" or employers "round
the country" acted similarly.
In the last century this legislation was
renewed by the passing of the Truck Act,
compelling employers to pay their workers
"in true coin of the realm". In view of all
the armed robberies of pay-packets today
there is a strong case for substituting
payment of wages by cheque for that of
cash.
In the eighteenth century the sufferings of
the poor were less observed than their
misdeeds. Burke, Fielding, and others
deplored the patronizing and contemptuous
pity which well-to-do people adopted even
towards the industrious poor. This lack of
sympathy and indifference to social justice
gave to "eighteenth-century respectability"
its "peculiarly sour taste". (H. O. Meredith,
Economic History of England, p. 196).
Robberies amongst the poor were frequent
in large towns because of their poverty and
neglect.
Mandeville protested against the penalty
of capital punishment for robbery which
English criminal law then prescribed. He
recommended the sending of robbers to
Morocco, Tunis, Algiers and other places
"to redeem the slaves held there". These
views were expressed in l725 in his
pamphlet, An Inquiry into the Causes of
Frequent Executions at Tyburn.
Mandeville's fame rests on a much better
known and influential book, The Fable of
the Bees or Private Vices, Public Benefits, 1714,
which was first published as a satire in
verse in 1705. It was one of the most
paradoxical, sensational, discussed and misunderstood
books in the learned circles of
England and France. He was regarded as an
economic Machiaevelli and an apologist for
unbridled selfishness in all departments of
life. Although Adam Smith criticised his
false notion of virtue, which regarded it as
consisting in "the entire extirpation of the
passions", the importance which Mandeville
assigned to self interest in social life inspired
Adam Smith's theory in The Wealth of
Nations that full scope should be given to
self interest in economic affairs.
The chief significance of Mandeville' s
book was that it helped to discredit moral
standards in economic and social life. His
views, particularly those on the subject of
luxury, were much discussed in French
journals. The subject of luxury gave rise to
an immense literature of attack and defence
in eighteenth-century France. Mandeville' s
book was translated into French in 1740.
Voltaire repeated some of his ideas in his
own Apology for Luxury. If "civilization",
as Mandeville suggested, involved the
granting of full scope to the acquisitive
instinct, and the arousing of new wants in
man, any religion that urged the need for
charity and moderation in social relations
could easily be regarded as the enemy of
progress.
Christianity was caricatured by Rousseau,
who considered it incompatible with good
citizenship. "A society of true Christians
would be no longer a society of men", he
wrote in The Social Contract (book IV,
chap. 7). Christianity had no social implications
for Rousseau. It is "an entirely spiritual
religion, concerned solely with heavenly
things; the Christian's country is not of this
world. He does his duty, it is true; but he
does it with a profound indifference as to
the good or ill success of his endeavours".
He forgot our Lord's words "Seek ye
first", not exclusively, "the kingdom of
heaven".
Mandeville was taken too seriously by
his age. His cynical remark that if a nation
wants to become rich and powerful "the
greater number of its people must be kept
ignorant as well as poor"-ignorant to
keep them contented and poor that they
may work all the harder-does not really
represent his own views of national
greatness. He would, however, confine the
knowledge of the "working poor" to those
things relating "to their calling". He would
be satisfied with technical education. That
seems to imply a criticism of civilization in
the sense of general intellectual improvement
and equality of educational
opportunity. In the preface to the 1714
edition of the Fable of the Bees he stated that
his object was to show "the unreasonableness
and folly of those, that desirous of
being an opulent and flourishing people ...
are yet always murmuring at and exclaiming
against those vices and inconveniences, that
from the beginning of the world to this
present day, have been inseparable from all
States that ever were famed for strength,
riches and politeness at the same time". He
goes on to say that if he were asked "where
I thought it was probable that men might
enjoy true happiness I would prefer a small
peaceable society, in which men neither
envied nor esteemed by neighbours should
be contented to live upon the natural
product of the spot they inhabit, to a vast
multitude abounding in wealth and power
that should always be conquering others by
arms abroad, and debauching themselves
by foreign luxury at home".
His personal preference for ideal or
utopian conditions of life did not prevent
his being realistic. "The great art to make a
nation happy and what we call flourishing,
consists in giving everybody an opportunity
of being employed; which to compass let a
government's first care be to promote as
great a variety of manufactures, arts and
handicrafts as human wit can invent; and
second to encourage agriculture and fishery
in all their branches". (Fable of the Bees,
ed. Kaye, 1924, vol. l, p. 197).
Apart from the problem of housing,
there are many excellent points in that
economic programme which could form
part of any modern political party's election
address. In the pamphlet already cited he
made a plea for Christian charity, or
fraternity, worthy of any churchman, and
equally lacking in details as to its
implementation. "Rich and poor", he
wrote, "should support each other with the
common comforts of life".
Religion And Capitalism
In his great work Religion and the Rise of
Capitalism (1926, pp. 184-186), R. H.
Tawney pointed out how the Church of
England failed to rethink and formulate ''in
new and living terms" its traditional social
doctrines in the light of the vastly complex
and changing economic and social environment
of the sixteenth century. The problem
of how to make the love of one's neighbour
effective posed new problems in an age of
growing economic imperialism like that
of the seventeenth century. "It did not occur
to it (the Church of England) to point
out . . . that the brethren of the English
merchant were the Africans whom he
kidnapped for slavery in America, or the
American Indians whom he stripped of his
lands, or the Indian craftsmen from whom
he bought muslins and silks at starvation
prices". The social doctrines advanced
from the pulpits, "in their traditional
form", offered little guidance. Even in
countries where there was no Reformation,
the traditional social teaching lagged behind
the pressing economic realities of the
modern world. The growth of Puritanism
accentuated the difficulty. "The moral self-sufficiency
of the Puritan nerved his will
but it corroded his sense of social solidarity.
A spiritual aristocrat, who sacrificed
fraternity to liberty, he drew from his
idealization of personal responsibility a
theory of individual rights, which
secularized and generalized was to be
among the most potent explosives that the
world has known". (Tawney, p. 230).
The Puritans' emphasis on individual
rights influenced the social theory not only
of lay people but of churchmen who did
not share their religious views. Tawney said
of the social teaching of the Church-he
meant the Anglican-that it was neglected
because it had become negligible. Judging
by the views expressed by men like William
Vincent, Dean of Westminster, in his
Sermons (ed. Nares, 1817, vol. l, p. 281 f) we
think Tawney's stricture seems justified.
The traditional Christian doctrine that
property is a social function as well as an
individual right is abandoned. Preaching at
Westminster Abbey in 1798 William
Vincent said: "Riches, perhaps, you may
think are abused ; but have not the rich a
right over their own wealth, to use it or
abuse it ... if a man injures himself only,
he is accountable to himself only to his
family or to God" . How unreasonable it is
to assume or imply, as the dean did, that the
abuse of one's property has no undesirable
social consequences outside those of one's
own family circle.
In another sermon preached on 13 May,
1792, which was " printed by order of the
Society for preserving liberty and property
against republicans and levellers" he
declared that " it is impossible for society to
exist without a class of poor". History and
experience confirm the word of God: "Ye
have the poor always with you". One
cannot claim divine sanction for the actual
volume of poverty in any age by quoting
that text. The true meaning is that owing
to human improvidence, incapacity, or
sickness, we will always have an opportunity
of exercising charity towards our less
privileged brethren. Allowing for the
emotional atmosphere generated in England
by the French Revolution, it is regrettable
that a representative churchman did not
observe greater moderation.
The views of Doctor W. Paley, auth or of
the Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy,
which went through fifteen impressions
from 1785 to 1804, are worth noting. He
was a rather inconsistent thinker. He
condemned the unequal distribution of
wealth in language difficult to reconcile
with his view that the established order of
society, in England, with regard to the
division of landed property, was the natural
order and sanctioned by God. Yet few have
denounced the exploitation of the many by
the few in words like the following:
"Among men you see the ninety and
nine toiling and scraping together a heap
of superfluities for one: (and this one too,
oftentimes the feeblest and worst of the
whole set, a child, a woman, a madman,
or a fool); getting nothing for themselves
all the while, but a little of the coarsest
of the provision which their own industry
produces; looking quietly on, while they
see the fruits of all their labour spent or
spoiled; and if one of the number take or
touch a particle of the hoard, the others
joining against him, and hanging him for
the theft." (op. cit., vol. I, p. 120).
It was a Christian note to assert that the
" partition of property" must not be rigidly
maintained against the claims of indigence
and distress. (p. 276). To do so was to sin
against the "Supreme Proprietor", and
defeat the purpose for which property
exists. Paley also condemned the slave
trade. In 1721 Bishop Berkeley had
protested against the view which equated
national prosperity with the size of the
national income irrespective of the use to
which it was put or how it was divided.
About forty years ago an Anglican
churchman stated that it was only
comparatively recently that "organized
Christianity in the main" abandoned the
"disastrous policy" of making no attempt
" to bring a large portion of human life
under the rule of the Christian law".
Catholicism as well as Protestantism had
tended, according to Canon C. E. Osborne,
since the Reformation " to confine the
interests of Christ's kingdom to the purely
individual aspects of religion, and in regard
to human society to the relation of the
sexes to one another. Industry, poverty, the
gaining and the use of wealth, all such
questions tended except as regards direct
personal honesty to be left untouched ...
by the Church". He also asserted that it was
not until Pope Leo XIII' s Encyclical on
Labour that the Catholic Church abandoned
the views of the liberal school of economists
who were opposed to any intervention by
the State with regard to the wage-contract
and "rack-renting". (Christian Ideas in
Political History, 1929, pp. 234-290).
History does not support the Canon's
criticism of Catholic social and moral
teaching. For centuries the text-books on
moral theology emphasised the conditions
requisite for a free contract, and the
importance of observing justice in all
economic transactions. If Catholicism in
England did not play a significant role in
promoting social justice and in checking the
growth of an unethical theory of
competition, one must remember that the
Catholic religion was outlawed, and that
Catholic priests had to be educated abroad
in countries whose economic and social
conditions were not quite the same as those
of England. Nevertheless, the Catholic
Church in England continued its traditional
role of the poor man's advocate. In a
Catechism published in London in l762 by
John Mannock, O.S.B., the poor man is
told something about his rights as well as
his duties. Amongst the sins listed under the
Seventh Commandment are "any extortion
and usury; taking advantage of the
necessitous by racking of tenants whom you
know they cannot remove: by forcibly withholding
servants' wages or by any other
violent methods". That catalogue of offences
covers the abuses of which Canon Osborne
complained. It should be noted that the
Anglican Church always held that man has
duties to society although it did not stress
those of the landed aristocracy in the
eighteenth century.
The contention that Protestantism, in all
its forms, particularly Calvinism, was
responsible for the evils which accompanied
the growth of large-scale capitalist enterprise
has led agile minds to retort that since
the abuses of Catholicism led to the
Reformation, hers is the greater sin.
The influence of Protestantism on the
growth of "the capitalist spirit"-which is
usually described as the unrestricted pursuit
of gain-has been examined by Max Weber
in a book entitled The Protestant Ethic and
the Spirit of Capitalism in the English trans.;.
lation by Talcott Parsons, 1930. His theories
with regard to the origin of modern
capitalism have been much debated. The
late Professor R. H. Tawney dealt with
them in his Religion and the Rise of
Capitalism, and pointed out the injustice of
regarding Calvinism or Puritanism in their
earlier forms as responsible for the creation
of the Capitalism of modern times. Calvin's
aim was not to establish a capitalistic
oligarchy but a theocracy administered by
a dictatorship of ministers of religion.
What the early Presbyterians, both in
England and Scotland, demanded was a
"godly discipline" with rigid control of
economic enterprise. These ideals were
never regarded as realistic by Calvinist
traders and merchants. They retained,
however, their masters' theology that
sanctity must be found in their daily
occupations. The more efficient and
successful their ordinary business in life was
the greater the assurance of their being
ranked amongst the saved. A reviewer of
Max Weber's book in The Times Literary
Supplement stated that "had there been no
Puritanism in England she would in all
probability have remained a rural country
for a century longer than she did". The part
played by Puritanism in bringing about the
substitution of manufacturing industry for
agriculture in the lives of the majority of
the English people, though real, was not as
important as suggested by this statement.
There were a number of converging
causes at work, scientific, political, and
economic, which made a great transformation
of the British economy inevitable,
but not the evils which accompanied it.
The growth of overseas trade, involving
wider markets for manufactures,
necessitated large-scale production which
gave an incentive to businessmen to apply
the new inventions and techniques made
possible by the progress of science since the
seventeenth century. The comparative
absence of State interference with industry
enabled employers to experiment with the
new techniques. The re-organization of
agriculture which led to the exodus of so
many small land-holders to the cities and
towns made it imperative to find alternative
employment for them. The growth of
population in the nineteenth century due to
the progress of medical and sanitary science,
which reduced the rate of mortality, would
have led to a lowering of living standards,
and possibly to a famine, if England had
been unable to expand the manufacturing
arm of her economy.
The reviewer, who obviously was an
Anglican, concluded that "our Church's sin
in this matter was not that she created the
system", which excited the scorn and grief
of men like Dickens and Disraeli, but that
"she did not condenm it in time".
It is strange that the Anglican Church,
which submitted to so much interference in
religious matters by the State, did not
pursue a more active policy in advocating
State intervention to check the abuses and
injustices connected with the factory system
in the early nineteenth century. Moreover,
the central and local government of
England was predominantly Anglican in
composition until the passing of the
Reform Act of 1832, and they also must
share the blame. The Roman Catholics in
England were numerically small and
uninfluential. Had they been more
politically realistic and not hankering after
the Stuart succession they might have been
granted full religious and civil rights sooner,
and have counted for more in the new
industrial era.
The Nonconformist Churches' attitude
to the new industrial system was more
consistent with their religious convictions.
Their members, which comprised a big
percentage of the working classes, distrusted
State intervention in the industrial sphere
lest it might lead in course of time to
interference with their religious liberty.
They relied more on appeals to the
individual conscience of employers and to
voluntary associations to remedy the evils
of the economic system. Like Alfred
Marshall, a great Cambridge economist,
they must have considered "the British
Factory Acts a standing disgrace to the
country" because they reflected the absence
of a spirit of social responsibility amongst
English businessmen.
Despite doctrinal differences with regard
to a creed, diversity of opinion as to a true
moral code, and almost insuperable barriers
concerning cult or worship, there never was
a greater awareness amongst all Churches
of the social implications of Christianity or
the bearing of the religion of the Incarnation
on the social and economic life of man.
NOTE
Some points discussed in this article are dealt with more fully in the writer's book, Property In The Eighteenth Century,
first published in 1930 by Cork U. Press and Longmans, and now reprinted with a new Introduction and published by Howard
Fertig, New York, 1969.

