For two reasons the year 1615 was an eventful one in the history of the Irish
Capuchins-who at that time were, indeed, very few in number, scattered throughout
various European provinces, with no identity of their own. That year is a landmark,
in the first place, because it saw the arrival of the first Capuchin in Ireland-Father Stephen
Daly, who had been an Irish Franciscan Observant and had joined the Capuchin Reform
in Belgium in the year 1607. [note: O'Connell, Robert, O.F.M.Cap.: Historia Missionis Hiberniae Fratrum Minoruni Capuccinorum, pp. 107 : 157. Written
in Latin, the original is in the Bibliotheque de Troyes, Ms. 706. There is a copy in the Irish Capuchin Provincial
Archives.]
In a short time he was joined by other confreres. Unlike
what often happens when a religious Order sets out to establish itself in another land-it
being found necessary to rely on the pioneering zeal of foreign religious-the introduction
of the Order into Ireland was remarkable in that it was entirely the work of Irish friars,
natives of the country who, by reason of conditions then existing in Ireland, had gone to
Europe to be educated and there had become members of the Order. Foremost amongst
them was Father Francis Nugent, a native of County Westmeath, who had been received
into the Order at Brussels in 1591 becoming the first Irish Capuchin.[note: Archbold, Father Nicholas, O .F.M.Cap.: Historie of the Irish Capuchins. Completed in 1643, p. 2. Original Ms. is in
the Bibliotheque de Troyes, Ms. 1103. Copy in the Irish Capuchin Provincial Archives. For convenience, we shall
refer to this source by the initials H.I.C.]
He was soon followed
by others, so that within a dozen years or so there existed a group of Irish friars engaged
in an active apostolate in various parts of Europe.
By the year 1615 Nugent himself had
gained a high reputation both inside and
outside the Order. His learning and
administrative abilities had made him a
marked man; his great gifts had been
availed of both by his superiors within the
Order, who had assigned him to positions
of high responsibility, and by the Holy See
which had entrusted him with missions that
brought him to the forefront of the Counter
Reformation in Europe. In the year 1610 he
had been sent to Germany to establish the
Order in the Rhineland, and at Cologne
laid the foundation of what were to become
two flourishing provinces on the Rhine. [note: For the life and achievements of this remarkable man cf. F. X. Martin, O.S.A.-Friar Nugent; Rome: Capuchin
Historical Institute, and London: Methuen & Co. Ltd., Essex St. Strand, 36. 1962.]
If Francis Nugent's lifework had ended here
he would have merited a high place
amongst the great men of the Order. But
his life's ambition was not yet realized:
before entering the Order in 1591, Nugent
had resolved, God willing, to establish the
Capuchins in his native land, and one of his
last acts as a layman was to put his valuable
library in trust for the future Capuchin
province in Ireland. [note: O'Connell, op. cit. 7; H.I.C. 2.] He never lost sight of
this ambition but its fulfilment was beset
with difficulties-the unsettled state of the
country-Ireland being, in effect, a
missionary country at the time-the
reluctance of the higher superiors to allow
the Order to be established (or even the
attempt made to establish it) in such unfavourable
and uncertain conditions; the
fewness of friars, and lack of means. But he
allowed no opportunity pass him by which
would further his cause. At length, in 1608,
Nugent, in an audience with Pope Paul V
at the time of a General Chapter held in
Rome of which Nugent was a member,
prevailed upon the Pope to sanction a
Capuchin mission to "England, Scotland
and Ireland".[note: H.I.C. 11-12; Bullarium Capuccinum, V. f. 278.] The Pope went further, by
granting such dispensation from the regulations
of the Order as the missionary
situation in Ireland might demand. The
first great obstacle had been overcome;
no one realized better than Nugent that
many more remained and that upon himself,
more than anyone else, the onus rested
for implementing the great work for which
he had been granted the papal permission.
Towards this end he directed all his
energies-seeking recruits for the mission,
trying to arrange their formation, training,
and preparation; he was, perforce,
dependent on the goodwill and cooperation
of the superiors of other provinces
who had little idea of what apostolic life
in this country would entail. Moreover, his
mission to the Rhineland, at the behest of
his superiors, had deflected his attention
from the mission to Ireland. So, it was not
until the year r6r5 that the first Capuchin
set foot in Ireland. This was partly due to
the circumstances already referred to, but
in part also to Nugent's determined policy
that no missionary should be sent out until
he had been especially trained for the work
before him and well moulded in the life of
a Capuchin friar.
It was in that same year that the second
and-as far as the future of the Irish
mission was concerned-more important,
event occurred. The need for a special
centre for the training and preparation of
religious for Ireland had been becoming
daily more apparent to Nugent-and now,
quite unexpectedly, an opportunity of
supplying what was needed presented itself
The provincial of Belgium, Father
Cyprianus, whom Archbold describes as
"a man always well affected unto our
mission" offered to Nugent a new friary to
be built at Charleville, a city on the Meuse
in the north-east of France, a few miles
from the Belgian border. Its patron, the
duke of Nevers, Charles De Gonzague, had
offered to build this convent for the
Capuchins of the Walloon district, but as
these were subjects of the king of Spain
they were loathe to establish a house in
French territory and, so, mindful of the
needs of the Irish friars, the superior found
a way out of a difficulty by presenting the
Charleville foundation to the Irish brethren.
Needless to say Nugent was only too glad
The Capuchin friary at Charleville, built by Charles de Gonzague, Duke of Nevers. There
were twenty-six friars' rooms, a spacious refectory, library, kitchen, and attached was a large
garden. A special room in the friary "the prince's chamber" was reserved for de Gonzague.
Picture shows – Les Capucins – the site and plan of the friary and church in Charleville on the River Meuse in the Department of Ardennes. The site was taken over in the traditional Capuchin style by planting a wooden cross in it; on the same day, 6 May 1615, the foundation stone of the friary was laid in the presence of the Duke. The friary was occupied on 3 October, 1620. The Church was completed and solemnly consecrated in 1625.
to accept "as a gift from God" the new
friary as a training ground for his Irish
missionaries. [note: H.I.C. 31.] The duke proved himself
more than generous towards the Irish, and
insisted on paying all the expenses involved
in the building of a solid friary and spacious
church; the latter, consecrated on 11 July,
1625, under the title of the Most Holy
Trinity and under the patronage of our
Blessed Lady, contained four small chapels
dedicated, respectively, to Saint Patrick,
Saint Francis, Saint Charles Borromaeo
(patron of the Duke Charles), and Saints
Columcille, Brigid, and the Irish patron
saints. [note: O'Connell, op. cit. 313.] O'Connell, the Capuchin historian,
relates that during the building of the
church, O'Donnell, the earl of Tyrconnell,
then in exile, passed through Charleville and
"like his ancestors . . . he greatly wished to
build the chapel of Saint Patrick at his own
expense ... but the duke of Nevers could
in no wise be induced to allow this ...
wherefore, O'Donnell ... provided for
placing over the altar a beautiful and costly
picture representing himself, as a comely
young man, praying at the feet of Saint
Patrick ... ".[note: ibid. 241-2; cf. H.I.C. §6.]
So, Charleville became the centre of the
Irish mission, the alma mater of the Irish
Province.
I.
It is against this background which we
have summarily described that we view the
foundation of the first Capuchin house in
Ireland, at Dublin. The formation of an
Irish community with its well-appointed
friary at Charleville was in marked contrast
to the fortunes of the friars who had
already come to Ireland. To quote from a
contemporary document [note: Report of Father Christopher Kearney on the state of the Capuchin Mission in Ireland, 29 Sept., 1654: Archiv.
S. C. Prop. Fide-III. Hibernia, Vol. 298, Fol. 956.] "in the
beginning, from the year 1615 to 1624,
when they were very few, they lived in
ones and twos in the houses of other people,
not as a regular community; but then as
numbers increased they established communities
. . . in buildings either newly
erected, or rented, and adapted for religious
use and as chapels in which they maintained
regular observance until the year 1651."
In September, 1623, the minister-general
of the Order appointed Nugent as visitator
to the Capuchins in Ireland; he was to
report on their missionary activity and
conditions of life and to promote their
interests. After a hazardous journey he
reached Dublin towards the end of May,
1624; it was forty-two years since he had
left Ireland. O'Connell states that Nugent
was determined upon establishing-and
beginning with Dublin-some form of
community life for his confreres who, until
now, had no regular abode.[note: O'Connell, op. cit. 285.] As the capital
of the country, Dublin was an obvious
choice to begin with as a centre for
missionary activity, and, being a seaport, it
facilitated travel to and from the Continent
-an important consideration. However,
the realization of this laudable objective was
beset with difficulties. The conditions of the
times were not favourable to the growth of
religious foundations in Ireland, let alone
the establishment of new ones-and in 1603
Pope Clement VIII had forbidden the
foundation of monasteries or convents
without the explicit permission of the Holy
See, as well as that of the local bishop, and
subject to the conditions that the locality
could reasonably support a community of
religious and that the other Orders already
possessing houses in the area be consulted.
In the case of Dublin, in particular, the
recently appointed archbishop, Thomas
Fleming, then in Louvain, had from there
instructed his vicar-general, James Talbot,
against the introduction of any new
religious house into the diocese. Such
serious obstacles might have deterred a less
determined man than Nugent; in spite of
them, he set about accomplishing his
purpose, and succeeded in assuring the
vicar-general that the archbishop, who was
his cousin, would be well disposed to his
case since the mission to Ireland had the
approval of the Pope and pointing out -
with a nice canonical distinction- that, in
this instance, the archbishop's instructions
allowed for a benign interpretation since
what was sought was, not the establishment
of a monastery or convent in a formal sense,
but a small residence for the purpose of
bringing his missionaries together in one
centre.[note: ibid. 285-6. Two years later the Holy See declared that the houses which the Capuchins established in Ireland, in
order the better to provide for the care of Catholics and the conversion of heretics, were not subject to the conditions
laid down in the Constitution of Clement VIII, and requiring a certain number of religious, because they were
mission stations, not convents or monasteries. (cf. Acta S. C. Prop. Fide, Vol. 4. fol. 165 n. 22). This meant that the
friars could henceforth set up new stations in other places without having recourse to the Holy See.]
This approach had the desired effect and
Nugent succeeded in founding a house in
Thomas Street outside Newgate. But protests
immediately arose from some other
religious Orders, and, indeed, despite
Nugent's optimistic assumptions, the course
of action he had taken did not find favour
with the archbishop who did not conceal
the fact- though it is only fair to state that,
a few years later, he was most generous in
his praise of the Capuchins.[note: Letter of Nov. 30, 1629, cf. Bull. Cap. V. f. 273.] It was the
citizens of Dublin who resolved the dispute;
as Archbold quaintly puts it: "som
Religious men, with the authoritie of the
Archbishop of Dublin, indevored to hinder
this disseign ... but (the prime citizens and)
one of the Aldermen tould unto them:
that if they went about to hinder the
Capucins to dwell in Dublin; it were in
vaine for themselves to keep in it: at which
words they surceased" [note: H.I.C. 39-40. §5.]
Father Edward Bath was appointed
superior of this the first Capuchin house in
Ireland. He was the son of Baron Bath of
Drumcondrath (County Meath) and, before
he entered the Order, a nun of substantial
means. Archbold describes him as a
"compagnion for any Prince or Prelate in
the world". He had become a Capuchin in
Paris in 1607 and had joined Nugent in
Cologne, taking charge of Irish novices
whom Nugent had received into the Order
in Germany. He first came to Ireland in
1618; some months before Nugent set out
for Ireland Father Edward had returned to
the Continent to consult with the Father
General whom he met in Paris. With
Nugent and Father Christopher Kearney he
returned to Ireland. He was a wonderful
preacher . . . "he hadd such a spirit and
efficacy of mouving his auditors ... that his
fame and name went all over Ireland ... ".
He was instrumental in converting many
Protestants and was well known for his
efforts amongst the students of Trinity
College-to the concern of the authorities
of the college.[note: For an episode which caused alarm amongst the authorities, cf. F. X. Martin, op. cit. pp. 268-9.] When Nugent returned to
France early in April of the following year,
he appointed Father Edward in charge of
the Irish mission- much to the latter's
reluctance- an office he held until Nugent's
second visit in 1629. This first superior of the
Capuchins in Dublin died in that city on
Christmas day, 1634, in his fifty-sixth year,
twenty-eight of which were spent in the
Order and sixteen on the Irish mission. He
is buried in Saint James's churchyard.[note: H.I.C. 93-4; 97; cf. p. 37; O'Connell, op. cit. 407-413.]
To Archbold we are indebted for the
information that the first residence of the
Capuchins was in Thomas Street; their stay
here must have been of comparatively short
duration for this writer tells us that by
1629, when Nugent next visited Ireland,
the chapel and residence of the friars was
situated in Bridge Street [note: H.I.C. 54.] -which led
down to the bridge spanning the Liffey at
the site of the present-day Father Mathew
Bridge. O' Connell [note: O'Connell, op. cit. 286-7.]
describes the residence
as small and poor, consisting of a few cells,
a little garden, and a small chapel, so
remarkable for its poverty that it was a
silent testimony to the Capuchins who
served it. Here they observed community
life and ministered to the people, who
according to Archbold, flocked to the
chapel in great numbers, drawn not only
to hear Father Edward's sermons but also
to go to confession and receive Holy
Communion. From here, too, the friars
went out to the people: to quote from an
account of the time:
"sometimes the Capuchins went amongst
the people, at other times the people
flocked to the Capuchins at home. They
were accustomed to preach both in Irish
and English, as both languages are spoken
in Ireland. In their own churches, and
also when preaching elsewhere, they
were most zealous in opposing heretics
and in comforting the Catholics by the
administration of the sacraments. The
good results of their labours are so great,
and so many, that a large volume would
be required to hand them down to
posterity". [note: Reports, Christopher Kearney, cf. note (9). O'Connell, op. cit. 287, who obviously had O'Kearney's report to hand,
gives an almost identical account. J
It is interesting to read that when a certain Father Gregory, a native of Normandy, who was inspired by reports
of the work in Ireland, petitioned Father Andrew Hussey, guardian of Charleville, in 1630, to be sent to the Irish
mission, his request was refused owing to his lack of a knowledge of the Irish language which was "more necessary"
than any acquaintance with English. cf O'Connell, op. cit. 341-2.]
In 1629 consequent on the proclamation
of the Lord Deputy Falkland against the
Catholic clergy, which was executed by
the Lord Justices, Viscount Loftus and
Boyle, earl of Cork, the church and
residence were confiscated, [note: Letter of Father Barnabas Barnewall from Dublin, 3 July, 1632, to the Commissary General in Belgium : cf
O'Connell , op. cit. 262: 269-273. F. X. Martin op. cit. p. 272 mentions that this house was in Cook Street.]
the house
being handed over to Trinity College as a
residential hall and given the name "St.
Stephen's Hall. Sir William Brereton in his
Travels in Holland, the United Provinces,
England, Scotland and Ireland. 1634-5 (p. 142)
writes of his visit in 1635 to
" ... St. Stephen's Hall wherein are
disposed about l8 scholars who are also
members of the college whereunto this
Hall is annexed. This sometimes was a
cloister for the Capuchins who said Mass
and preached in a pretty little chapel or
chamber: this was likewise taken from
them about that time and now there
are prayers in it twice a day ... ".
The friars were dispersed and for a time
they continued their work in the countryside
until the trouble eased and they again
came together as a community in Dublin"
altho' living in stealth and secrecy we
nevertheless have maintained a semblance
of community life" -this time in a private
house rented at £12 a year. This they had
done by the year 1632. From here they
continued their work though in a more
cautious manner. In a brief report to
Propaganda Fide of 3 April, l63l, Father
Barnabas Barnewall, superior of the mission,
states that they were prevented by the civil
authorities from holding any public
functions, that they dare not preach in the
city but could celebrate Mass and administer
the sacraments in private houses; outside
the city they preached freely in various
places. [note: Archiv. Prop. Fide.-III. Hibernia. Vol. 100. f. 170.]
Father Nicholas Archbold in a
letter to Cardinal Barberini of date
l2 March, l633, also refers to this residence
which he describes as "scarcely safe" but in
which monastic and missionary observance
is followed as well as possible. Two priests
and a brother formed the community-the
other priests were accustomed to go,
individually, into different parts of the
countryside for a month at a time,
preaching, catechizing, and administering
the sacraments; "innumerable are the
confessions heard, most frequent the
exhortations and sermons we preach to the
benefit of our hearers . . . the one thing
which grieves our heart is that many souls
may suffer loss by reason of the fewness of
our numbers ... [note: O'Connell, op. cit. 381-2.]
Although the site of the house which the
friars rented after the confiscation of their
friary in 1629 has been assigned to Cook
Street, we know from Father Nicholas
Archbold, then superior in Dublin, that by
1642 their residence was in Bridge Street"
secular nuns house and mansion: wee
hadd the forpart of it: which stood on the
street". By that time, too, they were
unmolested in the exercise of the ministry:
"the religious and priests enjoyed peaceably
the publik use of their chapells", and of the
Capuchins, in particular, he says that they
had a well-furnished chapel in which they
celebrated Mass every day in the religious
habit.[note: H.I.C. 145, and Letter of Father Nicholas Archbold to Propaganda, from. Potiers, 12 June, 1642. Archiv. Prop.
Fide, Vol. 295, Hibernia ad 1648, fol. 43.]
Early in 1642, however, the English
Puritan forces seized Dublin and destroyed
the churches and religious houses, including
that of the Capuchins-" entering violently
into the Chapells they laid hands on all they
could find: subverted the altars, tore, broke
and trampled under foot and burnt the
sacred pictures and turned ye Chappels to
Courts of Guard, so that we said Mass then,
up and down, in the Cittizens howses, but
were not long so, for the soildiers hadd an
eye to such howses, and russhing in laid,
now and then, hands uppon the Priest, and
ledd him to prison". [note: H.I.C. 144.] Archbold, scholar
and writer, notes with especial regret the
loss of their library-"our residence was
rifeled and our books taken away by
Captain Hipsley, a Minister's son. The first
two days he took no notice of ye place,
wherein wee putt them ... but, that wee
were betraied, as he tould us, by one who
revealed the matter unto him, one, who
doubtless seeing the house before, took
notice of our Bibliothec" [note: ibid. 148-9.]
Father Barnabas and other religious left
the city but Father Nicholas with Father
Felix Conroy and Brother Simon Lawless
remained in Dublin, continuing to minister
to the people as best they could-mostly by
stealth and in secret. But they did not for
long escape the attention of the soldiers.
Father Felix was twice arrested after saying
Mass but through the intervention of Sir
Charles Coot, governor of the city-who
was a friend of his father-he was set at
liberty and made his way to Connacht, his
native place. He eventually returned to
France and died at Charleville in 1645.
Father Nicholas was also arrested, betrayed
by an apostate Catholic but-as he recounts
himself-" escaped by giving drink inough
to the soyldiors and mony to the Judas".
His freedom was short-lived for in a matter
of days he was again arrested together with
Brother Simon and committed to prison;
even there, Father Nicholas found ample
scope for his priestly zeal and ministry, as
O'Connell, in a striking phrase puts it, "he
converted his prison into a sanctuary"; so
many were those who made their way to
him to receive the Eucharist that he was
compelled to conserve the sacred hosts in
sheets of clean paper, lacking a ciborium,
and to celebrate Mass on feast-days three or
four times-"benignly and reasonably
interpreting the laws" as O'Connell remarks [note: ibid. 145-7; O'Connell, op. cit. 495-8.]
However, the palm of martyrdom
eluded their grasp for the sentence of death
passed upon them was commuted to one of
exile [note: Commentarius Rinuccinianus, Vol. 1. 301.], and the two friars with twenty
other priests and religious were put on
boats for France. The religious tensions of
the time find echo in Archbold's account of
a Protestant mob shouting at them, as they
were led from the Marshalsea through the
streets of Dublin to the waiting boats, "the
Pope is dead, the Mass is gone-but the
truth I hope shall prove contrary with an
Alleluia singing: the Pope is alive, the Mass
is come home". After a journey of several
weeks, undermined in health but vigorous
in spirit, they joined their Irish confreres at
Charleville [note: H.I.C. 148-9; O'Connell, op. cit. 498.] where Brother Simon died in
1644.
Nicholas Archbold was a man outstanding
even amongst those distinguished
early Irish Capuchins. Born in l589, the
son of George Archbold, lawyer, of
Mountainfoot (Shankill) near Dublin, he
left Ireland in 1606 and studied in Belgium
for five years. Coming under the spell of
Francis Nugent he was received by him into
the Order at Cologne in 1611. Ordained
priest in Germany in 1616, he was one of
the Irish friars who went to Charleville in
1618 at the command of the minister
general and in 1622 was made guardian of
that community, a position he held for
three years. In l625 he was sent to Ireland
and, as we have seen, was superior in
Dublin when the uprising against the
Catholics took place in 1642. The historians
of the period leave us in no doubt that he
was an indefatigable missionary, burning
with zeal for the salvation of souls, a man
filled with "the spirit of the Lord and his
holy operation"; they quote instances of
wonders and miracles wrought by him.
With these spiritual and apostolic gifts he
combined a great erudition and learning; he
was scholar, theologian, poet, brilliant
controversialist, and a prolific writer. One
marvels how a man so actively engaged in
the apostolate and under such trying
conditions could have committed so much
to writing as he did-one account [note: Bibliotheca Scriptorum Ord. Min. Capuccinoruni by Father Bernard of Bologna , Venetiis, 1747.]
mentions more than twenty-five volumes
in Latin and in English on such varied
subjects as ascetical and spiritual theology,
apologetics, catechetics, liturgy, history and
poetry! Most of these works have perished
with time but two which have come down
to us, Evangelicall Fruict of the Seraphicall
Franciscan Order and The Historic of the Irish
Capuchins-the latter completed at Charleville
in 1643 after Father Nicholas had
returned there from Dublin-provide us
with invaluable sources for the history of
the early Irish Capuchins.
After a stay of almost three years in
Charleville, Father Nicholas, moved by
what he believed was unmistakable supernatural
inspiration, returned to the sorely
tried Irish Catholics in 1645. After a short
while in Dublin he was sent by the
commissary-general, Father Barnabas
Barnewall, to Wexford where he founded a
friary, becoming its first superior. After the
town was besieged and taken by Cromwell
in October, 1649, Father Nicholas remained
there, hiding by day, going out at night to
minister to the people and alleviate their
terrible sufferings during the plague which
devastated the city. He died, himself a
victim of the plague and "a martyr of
charity in manifold title" in the year 1650
at the age of sixty-one years of which he
had spent thirty-nine as a Capuchin and
twenty-two on the Irish mission. [note: O'Connell, op. cit. 599-605: Bonaventure Donnelly: Synopsis A1111alium Capucciitorum Hyberniae pp. 258-264 and 304.
The original Ms. of this latter work is in the Archivio di Stato, Milan. Copy in Irish Capuchin Provincial Archives.]
After the destruction of their house in
l642 and the exile of Archbold and Brother
Simon, the other friars worked in the
country until the opportunity offered of
returning to Dublin. In Dublin, particularly,
conditions remained unsettled and uncertain
for re-establishing regular community
life. Dublin was one of the few
places in the country which had remained
outside the control of the Confederates,
with consequent disadvantage for
Catholics. Later, the advent of Cromwell·
and the publication on 6 June, 1653, of the
edict reviving the statute passed for England
in the twenty-seventh year of Elizabeth,
proscribing the exercise of the Catholic
religion and ordering the departure of all
priests, made any resumption of religious
community life unthinkable. As a result, for
many years we have no trace of any
established community life for the
Capuchins in Dublin, though there is
abundant evidence that individual friars, in
spite of laws and decrees, were actively
engaged in ministering in Dublin at the
risk of their lives. Father Barnabas
Barnewall, vice-prefect of the Irish mission,
in a report to Propaganda in the year 1666
gives an account of the work of individual
friars in Dublin. [note: Arch. P. F. Scrittriferite Irlanda, Vol. II. ff. 189-202.]
There are indications that
in 1667 a Capuchin chapel existed in
Dublin. The will, dated 2 October, 1667, of
Lady Ursala Moore would suggest this; by
that will she bequeathed her silver chalice
to her son, Thomas Whyte, and arranged
that the interest on a sum of money "shall
pay the rent of the Capucins' Chappell in
Dublin". Lady Ursala, daughter of Sir
Gerald Moore, married Sir Nicholas Whyte
of Leixlip.[note: History of the Moore Family, compiled by Anne Countess of Drogheda, Belfast, printed by W. & G. Baird Ltd. (for
private circulation) p. 48.]
She and her son, Thomas
Whyte, had become Catholics through the
influence of Father Edward Bath, the first
superior of the Capuchins in Dublin, and
this son, Thomas, the person mentioned in
the will, entered the Capuchin Order at
Charleville in 1635, taking the name
Edward in memory of Edward Bath who
had died the previous year.[note: H.I.C. 97.] He is
mentioned in a report by Father Barnabas
Barnewall, vice-prefect, of the year l669
at which time he had been labouring on the
Irish mission for six years. The date of his
death in Ireland is unknown.
However, we have no indications of
where this Capuchin chapel mentioned in
Lady Ursala's will may have been situated.
From a report of Father Luke Nugent,
commissary-general, [note: Arch. P. F. Scritt. rif. Irlanda. Vol. 429. 3 Aug., 1671, No. 15.] we know that by
1671, when the severity of persecution had
somewhat abated, the Capuchins had reestablished
a hospice in Dublin (and in four
or five other places) but we are given no
indication of the site of their resumed
residence in Dublin. In a letter of l February,
of the following year to the Internuncio at
Brussels, we find Peter Talbot, archbishop
of Dublin, commending the efforts and
zeal of the Capuchins in his diocese.[note: ibid. scritt. rif. 3 Aug., 1671, Vol. 429.] The
archbishop of Armagh, Oliver Plunket, in
a letter written from Dublin in December,
1671 to the Nuncio at Brussels, testifies to
the exemplary life and work of the
Capuchins who have come to Ireland from
Charleville and states that they should be
allowed to have convents and hospices like
the Dominicans, Franciscans and Carmelites,
but laments the fact that the Capuchins,
like the Jesuits and Discalced Carmelites,
are all concentrated in Dublin or within
twenty miles of it (note: this is not quite
true as far as the Capuchins were concerned)
and hence suggests that they be distributed
more equitably throughout the country,
especially since they are good preachers,
and he would gladly receive them in
Armagh where they could do much
good.[note: Irish Capuchin Provincial Archives, Propaganda Transcripts, Scritt. riferite nei congressi, II. pp. 336-340. (Arch.
P. F. Lettere. Vol. 429).]
With the advent of King James II in 1685,
religious toleration and freedom were
restored to Catholics; the churches and
religious houses were repaired or rebuilt.
The Capuchins, in particular, came into
their own, for this monarch in a document
addressed from the palace of Whitehall,
3l May, 1686, to the archbishop of
Armagh, Primate of All Ireland, lauded
their way of life, commended them
particularly to the care of the bishops, and
empowered the restoration of the former
convents and the erection of new ones "in
any city or town or place". [note: Donnelly, op. cit. 293ff.] The
Capuchins, though few in number, were
not slow to take advantage of the king's
favour-they set about restoring their
convents and established a novitiate at
Drogheda, the first Capuchin novitiate in
Ireland. Father Bonaventure Donnelly, the
future annalist, was the first novice to be
received there in the year 1686 and the first
Capuchin to make religious profession in
Ireland.
In Dublin the friars built what must have
been for them a fairly large convent, as we
know from a report submitted in 1701 to
Propaganda by Father Lawrence Dowdall,
ex-commissary-general.[note: Arch. P. F. Irlanda. Vol. VI. f. 322.
that the Capuchins did not have amongst
them some who, indeed, fell far short of the
ideal, or even of the exemplary; being a
community of men, they surely had, but I
think it can be said that the credit of their
worth has out-balanced the deficit of
shortcomings and they have left behind
them a high example of fidelity to the ideals
of the Poverello and a notable record of
Capuchin apostolate. The continuation of
that tradition in the modern era, which
began with the final and permanent
establishment of the Capuchin church and
friary in Church Street, is a theme worthy
of another account.]
From other
sources [note: Egerton Ms.-Report of the Roman Catholic Chapels in Dublin, 1749. Dr. John Curry in his Historical Collections says
that during King James II's stay in Ireland the residence of the Capuchins was "between School-house Lane and
St. Audoen's Arch."]
we know that this convent was
situated in Saint Audoen's Arch. In this
friary there were twenty-four religious who
led a full conventual life as well as being
engaged in an intense apostolate. The
freedom they enjoyed permitted of their
wearing of the beard and of their religious
habit "to the great astonishment, I might
say, ecstacy, of the people"; the office of
matins was chanted at midnight to the
accompaniment of full liturgical ceremonial
including the ringing of the bell-which at
first was no small occasion of alarm after
long years during which the silence of
Catholic church-bells pervaded the land.
To quote from the above-mentioned
report:
"the first night when we rang the bell at
midnight for matins, the people who
heard it thought it was meant as a fire
alarm and ran in crowds to the door of
the church. When they heard the friars
chanting the office in choir, some ~f the
Protestants amongst them were filled
with astonishment and compunction; l
others, more obstinate, threw stones
through the windows, attempting to
break the lamp that was burning before
the Blessed Sacrament. Such a scene had
not taken place in this country for over
two hundred years. From this night
forward, when our midnight bell was
heard, the Catholics in their homes were
wont to arise from their beds and spend
some time in prayer, and the Protestants
on hearing it closed their places of
business and ceased work."
From Father Dowdall' s report it would
seem that this convent was built in the year
1688 or 1689, since he states that the friars
lived in it for a period of two years before
it was suppressed after the flight of King
James following the battle of the Boyne.
With their convent suppressed and all
they had taken from them, the friars went
to live in the houses of friendly lay people,
and in the meantime carried on their
ministry by assisting in parish churches both
in the city and in the country. Later, with
the tolerance or connivance of the civic
authorities, they resumed active and full
apostolate in a rented house, until 1698
when an edict of the Dublin parliament
compelled by law all regulars to quit the
kingdom. This notwithstanding, some of
the Capuchins remained in Dublin in
hiding and continued to celebrate Mass and
to minister in parish churches.
II
Up to this period the Capuchins had
been living on the south side of the city.
We have no information as to when,
precisely, they crossed the river and moved
into Church Street which has for so long
been associated with them. The report of
Father Lawrence Dowdall, referred to
above, relates-as we have seen-that after
the suppression of the friary in St. Audoen' s
Arch, the friars ministered in a "rented
chapel", but without giving any indication
as to where this rented chapel was situated.
It was probably intended as a temporary
arrangement. There are, however, indications
that would seem to justify the
assumption that this chapel was situated in
Church Street-and that it was at this
point of time that the friars crossed the
Liffey. An information sworn by one
Margaret Meelanan, on 3 May, 1691,
against John Williams, alias Father Innocent
Weldon, a Capuchin, for being a Popish
priest states:
"we heard him preach in ye Popish masshouses
in Church Street and Channel
Row". [note: British Museum additional Mss. 38856 (Hodgkin Papers, Vol. XI. p. rn9).]
Channel Row was the original name for
what was later North Brunswick Street.
A State Paper of 10 August, 1695,
endorsed Popery in Dublin informs us that a
Father McMahon was the superior of the
Capuchins in Oxmantown (the old name
for Church Street).[note: Public Records Office. Calendar of State Papers (Ireland). S. P. Dom. Ireland. 357 No. 56.]
In a document in Marsh's Library,
Dublin, containing a list of the priests in
Dublin in l697, there is found under the
heading "St. Michan's Parish" the entry:
"Lawrence Dowdall, lodgeing att
Matthias Burgesses in Church Street;
Regular: John Weldon, Capuchin Frier,
lodgeing at Luke Dowdall' s in
Smithfield"
and under the heading "St. Paul's" a
similar entry:
"Father John Weldon Capuchin ffryer
lodgeing in Smithfield" .[note: cf. Irish Ecclesiastical Record, Vol. IX. Third Series, 1888, pp. 4rn: 413.]
Father Innocent, alias John, Weldon was
received into the Order at Charleville in
1657. He came to Ireland in 1665 and spent
thirty-five years working both in Dublin
and in England. He suffered several terms of
imprisonment, and finally returned to
France in 1700. By this time-since 1685-
the Irish Capuchins in France had ceased to
live at Charleville and Sedan, which they
had acquired in 1641, and had transferred
to the convents of Bar-sur-Aube and Vassy
which had been given them in exchange by
Louis XIV, king of France. These two
convents remained in their hands, part of
the Irish Province, until 1790 when the
convents were confiscated in the French
Revolution. On his return to France, Father
Innocent became guardian of the community
at Bar-sur-Aube, in 1701, and also
consultor to the custos, the Irish mission
having been made a custody in 1698; he
died at Bar-sur-Aube in 1707 at the age of
sixty-six years.
The Father Lawrence Dowdall also
named in the document quoted above ,is
presumably the same who was commissary-general
and whose report, already referred
The friary in Bar-sur-Aube, Department of Aube, where the Irish Capuchins who had to leave
Charleville lived from 1686 to 1790.
to, states that he departed from Dublin for
England in the year 1698. We may possibly
be justified in concluding that the "rented
chapel" mentioned by him was a room in
the house in which he was lodging,
belonging to Matthias Burgess. The late
Father Angelus Healy, in some notes which
he compiled several years ago, suggested,
as a probability, that the site of this chapel
may have been "on the east side of Church
St., more or less opposite St. Michan's".
He bases this opinion on the fact that a
certain John Burgess had-some years
previously-been given a grant of a number
of tenements and a piece of land in that
locality. But, whatever the validity of this
opinion, from the official documents, it
would seem that the Capuchins had settled
in Church Street after they had left
St. , Audoen's Arch-and here they have
remained ever since.
The "rented chapel", mentioned by
Father Dowdall-whatever its site-was
suppressed in the year 1698, as his report
states, and for the next twenty years or so
there is no information as to where the
Capuchins in Dublin were living-although
there is plenty of evidence that they
remained there all that time. The Book of
Enactments of the Irish Capuchins of the
convents of Bar-sur-Aube and Vassy affords
us a little information-for example, at a
meeting of l December, 1698, at Vassy,
provision is made for helping "the
missionaries who live in Dublin whenever
it will be possible for them to live in a
convent or hospice": which shows that the
friars were there but without conventual
dwelling. A very interesting item - considering
the conditions of the times - is
recorded on 12 December, 1706, when
Fathers Paul, Sebastian and Mark (this latter
was, in 1714, employed by the Irish
hierarchy to conduct their affairs in Rome)
are deputed to visit the provinces of
Leinster, Munster and Ulster, respectively,
for postulants and to bring them to Dublin
to be examined by the aforementioned
Fathers Paul and Sebastian with Father
George Browne, then superior of the friars
in Ireland, and Father Francis Warren. Yet
from the same source we know that in 1713
the friars had not yet acquired a new
residence in Dublin, although at meetings
of this time, and earlier, reference is made
to the existing hospices in Ireland. In
November, 1714, however, we read of the
appointment of Father Joseph Ivers as
"superior of our hospice in Dublin".
Presumably, then, in that year, 1714, the
Capuchins again established a residence in
Dublin. After being superior for four
years Father Ivers was, in 1718, appointed
vice-custos in Ireland. [note: Book of Enactments of the Irish Capuchins of the convents of Bar-sur-Aube and Vassy-Archives departementales
de l'Aube, Troyes. Copy in Irish Capuchin Provincial Archives.]
Unfortunately, the Book of Enactments
gives no indication of the location of this
newly-established convent or hospice, but
we may reasonably conclude that it was in
Church Street. In a report of the minister
and church wardens of the parish of Saint
Michan's, Dublin, it is stated that:
"there are three publick Mass houses in
ye said Parish one in Marys Lane another
in Arran key both built as we are
inform'd before the first of King George
the lSt. the other in Church Street fitted
up into a Mass house since the lst of
King George the lst". [note: Archivium Hibernicum Vol. IV. p. 141.]
This latter church referred to in the
report-although it is not stated-was,
most probably, the church of the Capuchins,
"fitted up" after the year 1714 when
George I came to the throne. This
harmonizes with the statement of the
Egerton manuscript, Report of the Roman
Catholic Chapels in Dublin, 1749:
"Church Street chapel was fitted up in
the year 1720, for the use of the Capuchin
Friars (who in the reign of King James IL
lived at St. Audoen's Arch) by Father
Joseph Evers, Superior of the Order."
To resolve the apparent contradiction
between the date l720 of the Egerton
manuscript and the earlier one of the Book
of Enactments we should note that the
manuscript speaks only of the chapel being
fitted up, whereas the Book of Enactments
refers only to the convent or hospice, that
is, the residence of the friars-two distinct
entities. The "fitting up" of this chapel may
have come some time after the friars had
established themselves, or the term could
imply the setting up of a permanent chapel
after a temporary place of worship had
been used by the friars. However that may
be, there is to hand further information
from the year 1721. A document in the
Public Record Office, London, dealing
with religious houses in Dublin, gives the
report, written in Dublin on 2 February,
1721, of the spy, Garcia, which states that
the Capuchins at that time had a chapel in
Church Street in the house of Mr. Clemens,
a paymaster of his Majesty's treasury and
that living in it were:
Father Anthony Dowdall,
Father Francis Bennet,
Father Ivers,
Father Burke,
all Capuchins.
This document agrees with the Egerton
manuscript both as to date and as to place,
and regarding Father Evers. Nor does it run
counter to what we have learned from the
Book of Enactments, since it confirms the
existence of a community, and, as we have
seen, Father Joseph Evers who had been the
superior of the Dublin community was
appointed vice-custos of the mission in
l7I 8 and continued in that office till 1724,
and was, presumably residing in Dublin.
The most interesting feature of this report
of Garcia is that it gives the location of the
church-in the house of Mr. Clemens. This
Mr. Clemens-or, correctly, Clements - belonged
to the family of the later Lords
Leitrim. One of this family, Nathaniel, was
chief ranger of the Phoenix Park, for whom
the Viceregal Lodge was built as a residence.
His son, afterwards the first Lord Leitrim,
sold it in l782 to the government as a
residence for the viceroy; it is now the
official residence of the President of Ireland.
The reference to Mr. Clements is of
particular importance because it enables us
to establish the fact that the church which
existed in 1721 occupied the same site as
that on which the present church of the
Capuchins stands today. In the lease of the
site of the present church (which in 1875
was sold in fee simple to Father Patrick
O'Reilly) made on 4 August, 1826 by the
earl of Longford and Viscount de Vesci to
Father Bonaventure Delaney, Capuchin, it
is mentioned that the property then being
leased had been formerly in the possession
of James Topham and later in the tenancy of
Robert Clements on which a Roman
Catholic chapel had been built. (This
chapel is the old building which stood there,
since the present church was not erected in
1826). Another lease of 1834 dealing with
property which adjoined our church and
which is now incorporated in the ground of
the friary describes the plot as being
bounded on the south side by what was
formerly known as Roscommon House,
"now a chapel and a chapel yard". [note: Irish Capuchin Provincial Archives.]
These references go to show that the
chapel of 1721 set up in the house known as
Roscommon House and tenanted by Mr.
Clements stands on the same site as the
present-day church. Thus, the wanderings
of the Capuchins from one place to another
in Dublin had come to an end; they had
pitched their tent in Church Street where it
has remained since.
The present church of Saint Mary of the
Angels is the third one to be built on this
site. Roscommon House, in which the
original church existed, stood on the street
to the front of today's church. We have no
information as to how the friars acquired
the place, but owing to the disabilities
under which Catholics, and especially their
clergy, laboured at that period, it is most
likely that the site was leased for them by
some lay people. Nor have we any
information as to the extent of the site. On
Roques Map of Dublin (1773) the church,
a small irregular building fronting the
street, is shown on the north-eastern corner
of a plot of ground about 170 feet by 70
which ran from. Church Street towards the
present Bow Street. It is likely that this
plot did not go with the church since the
Capuchins later secured the lease of it.
Roughly speaking, this first church was
about half the width of today's church (not
including the more recent addition of the
Sacred Heart chapel) and about half its
length.
Doctor Donnelly in his Churches in
Dublin (p. l8) states that this church "was
entirely repaired, in 1736, by contributions
collected by Father Alexius Dowdall,
superior also of the said Order". Father
Alexius Dowdall was then vicar-provincial
of the Irish Capuchins, Ireland having been
created a Province in 1733. He died in 1738.
The Egerton manuscript describes the
church as it was in 1749:
"the chapel is small and neat and the
altar decent. The altarpiece is a
Crucifixion, though formerly it was a
painting of our Saviour taken down from
the Cross, which piece is much admired
by Connoisseurs. There are two images
one of the B.V.M. with Jesus in her arms.
The other of St. Francis with the
Capuchin Habit. There is a gallery which
serves for choir with a vestry but no
confessionals".
Apropos of these pictures of Our Lady and
Saint Francis, they were placed in the
reconstructed, second, church. The late
Father Stanislaus Kavanagh in some of the
random notes [note: ibid.] compiled by him during a
long life dedicated to the history of the
province, tells of a rather interesting
incident connected with the pictures. On an
occasion when some workmen were engaged
in the church, one of them recognized
the picture of the Blessed Virgin Mary to
be valuable. He asked Father McSweeney,
who was then a member of the community
if he were aware of the fact, but the priest
had heard no special praise of it; "it is said
that expert opinion was then obtained and
the judgement passed on it was that it was
the work of one of the celebrated artists".
Father McSweeney was a member of the
Church Street community for about seven
years from l836. It would be interesting to
know what became of that painting.
From Doctor Donnelly's work on the
Dublin churches, referred to above, we
learn that the original church, already
repaired in 1736, was taken down and a
slightly larger one erected in the year 1796.
We have no information concerning this
work. There exists an eighteenth-century
Account Book of the Dublin community
which seems to have been used-at least in
part-for the registering of the names of
subscribers towards the "rebuilding" of the
chapel and which contains the names of
benefactors, but since it bears no date it
could, from the internal evidence, refer
either to the work of 1736 or to the rebuilding
in l796.
In 1796, the superior was Father John
(Morgan) O'Brien, who died in 1807 at the
ripe old age of eighty. This was a period in
which the Catholic community had begun
to reassert itself, favoured by a gradaul
relaxation of the penal code and by the
resurgence of the national spirit; it was the
period of Wolfe Tone and the United
Irishmen. Contrary to what is often
asserted, there is good reason to believe that
the main body of the Irish clergy were
sympathetic to the national movement of
the time, even if they did not always give
it public expression. This was certainly the
case with several of the Dublin Capuchins
at the time. The Church Street district
seems to have been deeply involved in the
organization of the United Irishmen, which
had its reactions within the Capuchin
community. The informer, William
Corbet, reporting to the Castle authorities
on the Franciscan priests in Dublin stated:
"In Church Street there are two chapels - one
a parish chapel, the other a friary. In
the friary there are two men by the name
of Corcoran, both of moderate principals,
for which they are much disliked by their
brethren. In the same chapel are three
others. The most inflammatory is Casey
(sic) . . . the next is Cashell . . . the third
Leonard. A brother of the above Casey
(sic) is a priest of Mary's Lane chapel, and
be is equally zealous in the cause of
sedition".
In this report the name "Casey" is
incorrectly written for "Carey". The parish
chapel referred to as being in Church Street
was the then parish church of Saint Paul's
to which there was an entrance in lower
Church Street-hence the report gives it as
being in that street, though generally it is
referred to as being in Arran Quay.
According to the documents in the Irish
State Paper Office, Father Cashell and
Leonard are described as "perfect
firebrands" and both together with Father
Carey as being members of a republican
society in Church Street in 1796. [note: Irish Ecclesiastical Record. 5th Series. Vol. LXVII. Oct., 1945: Priests in the Independence Movement of '98 by Doctor
Richard Hayes.]
In another list supplied in October, 1796,
by the same informer, Corbet, we find:
"In Dublin there are l5 chapels ... of
which 9 are parish chapels and 6 friaries,
viz ........ 4) Church Street-O'Brien,
prior, a democrat. Two of the name of
Corcoran, moderate. Caffry, negative.
Leonard, Cashell, Carey, violent democrats.
(The last mentioned is in the
country beyond Swords superintending
the farm of his cousin who fled from
defenderism) ".
The " moderate" priests were constitutional ;
the " negatives" had no political opinions;
the " democrats" were supporters of the
Independence Movement. The "defenderism"
referred to was the Orange opposition
to the Irish movement. [note: ibid. 5th Series, Vol. LXVIII. Aug., 1946. pp. 96-97.]
Documents preserved in our archives
confirm that the priests mentioned in these
reports were in the Dublin community at
this period. The two Corcorans were
Father Celestine (Patrick) and Father
Fulgentius (Thomas). (Some twelve years
earlier there were in the community three
priests named Corcoran-none related to
the other, as far as we know-but the
senior of them, Father Marianus Corcoran,
was dead by the year 1796). It is interesting
to note that, with the exception of Father
Simon Cashell, all those named in the
report are mentioned in the list of
ecclesiastics (where Father Carey's name is
also incorrectly given as Darcy) in the
diocese of Dublin who had taken the oath
of allegiance in 1782.[note: Arch. Hib. Vol. I. pp. 54, 58, 63, 64.] It would seem that,
at least in the case of some, their action in so
doing was motivated by a desire to rid
themselves of civil disabilities, as guaranteed
by the Act of George III., rather than by any
particular devotion to his Majesty.
Father John Baptist Leonard, mentioned
in the report, was later (l807-l810)
provincial of the Order. In l808 he obtained
permission from Rome to receive novices
in Ireland; one of those admitted to the
novitiate by him in 1810 was Theobald
Mathew, the future apostle of Temperance.
Father Celestine (Patrick) Corcoran, a
native of Garristown, Co. Dublin, was
received into the Order at Bar-sur-Aube in
1763. He was on several occasions superior
of the Church Street community and was
three times provincial; after his last term in
this office he was succeeded, in l822, by
Father Theobald Mathew, whose novice-master
he had been. Father Corcoran was
an intimate friend of Doctor Lanigan, the
historian, who came to live with him in a
place in North King Street where Father
Corcoran was then residing. Father
Corcoran died on 24 March, 1823, aged
seventy-eight years.
It would seem that the church, reconstructed in 1796, was later renovated for in
an account of l831 [note: (Rev.) G. N. Wright, A. M.: An Historical guide to ancient and modem Dublin, London, 1831, pp. 188-189.]
we read:
"the Capuchin Friary, better known by
the appellation of Church Street Chapel
is situated on the west side of the street
and not far from. Michan's Church . . .
the building itself offers no remarkable
features. This structure was for a long
period in a state of dilapidation until the
manly eloquence of Rev. P. Keogh, a
friar of the Capuchin order, influenced
the wealthy part of his hearers ... to
contribute largely to the restoration of
the edifice . . . ".
The state of dilapidation which was
rectified through the appeals of Fr. Keogh
could not refer to the first church, taken
down in 1796, since Father Keogh was a
mere child at that time.
Mention of Father Keogh-and in
contemporary chronicles, he is much
mentioned-recalls one of the outstanding
Dublin Capuchins of the period. Michael
Bernard Keogh was a native of Dublin,
born in Cook Street, where his father was
a carpenter and undertaker. Unfortunately,
we have very few details of his early
religious life. After his ordination he was
attached to the Dublin community where
he found a fruitful field for the exercise of
his natural gifts. He belonged to a period
which was remarkable for the number of
brilliant Irishmen who graced the country
by their eloquence and literary genius-and
contemporary accounts rate Father Keogh
as probably the most eloquent preacher of
his day, a powerful supporter of the
Catholic and popular causes, and a
champion of the poor. Although in personal
appearance not prepossessing, he had a
natural charm of manner, was endowed
with an exuberant humour and a sparkling
wit that made him a welcome guest at any
gathering. He was noted, too, for his rare
powers of mimicry. Fitzpatrick in his Irish
Wits and Worthies says of him: "There was
no public speaker from Grattan to
O'Connell whom he could not personate
to the life". This writer records many
anecdotes of the popular Capuchin.[note: The Father Mathew Record, May, 1919.] Due
to a scarcity of priests in the archdiocese at
the time, Father Keogh acted for some years
as a curate in the church of Saint Audoen,
and from 1818 to 1831 was parish priest of
the parish of Baldoyle and Howth. Early in
183l his health, never robust, compelled
him to resign his pastoral charge. To the
end, the wit that had so often charmed his
intimate friends, did not desert him ..
Shortly before he died a clerical friend who
was well known for following the foxhounds,
paid him a visit: "Ah! Father
John", he said, in a feeble whisper, "you
were always in at the death!" The end came
on 9 September, 183l, at the early age of
forty-three years. The remains of the gifted
Capuchin are interred in the vaults of
Saints Michael and John. A tablet erected to
his memory in the parish church of
Baldoyle, is now at the Capuchin house in
Raheny.
A confrere of Father Keogh-in the old
chapel-and another famous man-was
Father Michael (in religion, Peter) Kinsella,
also a Dublinman, who had been received
into the Order at Bar-sur-Aube, France, in
1785. He was, perhaps, the last surviving
link with the Irish friaries in France,
because he was still in France when the
Revolution came. When the inventory of
the convents was taken by government
order in 1790 he declared his intention of
not leaving-and remained in France until
expelled in 1792. We first find trace of him.
in Dublin in 18or. In 1814 he was appointed
chaplain to the Poor Clares Convent,
Harold's Cross, when the sisters went there
in October of that year. Father Kinsella
was a distinguished nun of learning and
well known in the circle of literati of the
time. Edward O'Reilly, author of the Irish
Dictionary acknowledges, in the preface to
his work, the literary assistance of Father
Kinsella in pointing out "most of the
The Capuchin Church at Church Street, 1796.
Hebrew words which are found to agree
with the Irish in the course of my book".
We find his name, along with those of
eleven other Capuchins, among the
signatures to the protest against the
Quarantotti Rescript-the rescript promulgated
by Monsignor Quarantotti, acting
secretary of Propaganda Fide, while Pope
Pius VII was the prisoner of Napoleon at
Fontainebleau, which counselled acceptance
of a Relief Bill for Catholics proposed in
the British parliament but providing for a
royal veto on the appointment of bishops
and a royal placet on papal documents
coming into Ireland or Britain. The protest
came at a meeting in May, 1814, of a large
body of the Dublin clergy who nude it
plain they would not accept the recommendations.
[note: McCaffrey: History of the Catholic Church in the Nineteenth Century, Vol. II. P. 157.] Father Kinsella died in l829
and was interred in the newly-acquired
Catholic cemetery at Golden Bridgewhere,
incidentally, the very first interment,
in October of the same year, was that of
Father Kinsella's confrere, Father Lawrence
Silvester Phelan. The Dublin Weekly
Register of 14 November, 1829, noting the
passing of Father Kinsella, has this to say
of him:
"he was the author of several excellent
works, and the translator of many
others ... and of some valuable essays on
the language and antiquities of his native
country, which he loved with the most
patriotic ardour. His talents were of the
first order, and his acquirements rendered
him superior to most of his contemporaries;
yet his unassuming modesty
prevented him from being known except
to a few select friends, who were capable
of discovering and appreciating his
worth."
Father Joseph(Jeremiah Purcell) O'Reilly,
a native of Cork city, was guardian in
Church Street for three years from 1836.
He was later to find an honoured place in
the annals of the Church in New Zealand
by reason of his work in Wellington where
Father O'Reilly, first Parish Priest of
Wellington 1 New Zealand.
he arrived in 1843, when the colony was
young, and where he died-a legendary
figure-in 1880 at the age of eighty years.
His term in Church Street is of interest
since from notes written by Father Edward
Tommins we learn that Father O'Reilly,
when guardian, intended to build a church
in Upper Dominic Street, but this idea was
not persevered in.
The fact that the church was damaged by
the great storm of January, 1839, may have
given added impetus to the movement
towards building a new church; at any
rate, we can gather that at this period the
friars were finding their church inadequate
and were considering building a larger one
as well as a friary for the religious. During
all this time they had no proper friary or
monastery, and had been living in various
places, sometimes one friar alone, other
times two or three together. In l809 Father
Celestine Corcoran secured a plot of ground
between Bow Street and the old church,
on which he erected a building, the lower
part of which formed what was known as
"Church Street Schools", the upper storey
being used as a residence for some of the
religious. Later, we find that a number of
them resided in what is referred to as the
"community house", 14 Prussia Street, and
afterwards in l8 Queen Street. Manor
Street and Blackhall Place were also places
of residence for a period of time. None of
these residences could, in any sense, be
called a friary and they all laboured under
the great inconvenience of being situated at
a distance from the church-but it was the
best that could be done.
A fundamental difficulty confronting the
friars in the matter of building was the lack
of space on which to build. We have already
referred to the plot of ground on which the
original church stood, of which they
acquired a lease in l826 and eventually
bought in 1875, and mention has just been
made of a plot near the church which
Father Corcoran acquired in 1809. But
these were not sufficient for the building of
a church and of a friary, and for a very long
time no more ground could be procured.
After a visitation made by Father Victor
of Chamounix, as delegate of the minister-general,
in 1857, a movement got under
way towards bringing all the religious
together into one community. Just at this
period-in 1855-lreland lost its status as a
province and became a commissariate. This
was because of the fewness of the friars,
some of whom were old and infirm as well.
To help them carry on, the minister-general
sent friars from other provinces of
the Order to Ireland and in the late l850's
and early l860's a number of Italian friars
were in Ireland. These men did trojan
work, especially in Dublin and in Cork.
In 1861, Father Lawrence Gallerani, an
Italian from the province of Bologna, was
appointed commissary-general in Ireland
and took up residence in Dublin. Before
coming to Ireland he had been a
distinguished missionary in India and had,
in fact, twice refused to accept the bishopric
to which he had been nominated by
Pope Pius IX. Father Lawrence, a capable
administrator and a man of action,
immediately set himself to the task of
building a friary and a church in Dublin.
When he could not procure any ground
near the existing chapel except on a short
lease of thirty years, he began to look round
for another site, and found one in North
King Street, No's. 47-50. With the permission
of the archbishop of Dublin,
Doctor Cullen, he set about acquiring these
sites. First, he got possession of No's. 49
and 50 and the two houses were fitted up
as a temporary convent pending the
erection of new buildings; on 23 July, 1862,
the community left Queen Street and took
up residence in them. Later in that year he
obtained possession of the other two
houses, and acting on the advice of the
archbishop to build the convent before
starting the new church, he had proceeded
to do so. But then an unexpected bombshell
dropped on him-he was notified by the
archbishop of the opposition of the clergy
of the parish of Saint Michan's to the
proposed building of the Capuchin church
in North King Street, chiefly on the
grounds that the site was nearer to their
church than Church Street where the old
church stood. This, naturally, caused a
great flurry of excitement and a lengthy
correspondence ensued. The erection of the
convent, however, continued and during
the negotiations between Father Lawrence
and the archbishop it was even proposed to
build the church in North Brunswick
Street but the idea was carried no further.53
There was a tradition amongst the friars
that the opposition of the clergy of Saint
Michan's, if not inspired by, was at least
not unwelcome to, the Irish friars
ministering in Church Street! One can
understand, indeed, that for them this old
place had an appeal that it could not have
for a stranger such as Father Lawrence was.
The upshot was that the Capuchins went
no further in North King Street than
building the convent which they inhabited
for a number of years. After the present
friary was built, the North King Street
property was disposed of in 1883. This old
friary can still be seen standing a little in
from the street. To this day one can see a
cross on the front of Messrs. Murphy & Co.,
48-49 North King Street-this cross once
stood on the iron gateway that led to the
Capuchin convent and was placed in its
present position when that gateway was
taken down.
Although Father Lawrence left Ireland in
l864, there appears to have been no
immediate alterations in the plans for
building a church in North King Street - at
least in the Irish Catholic Directory for
1865, the Capuchins acknowledge the
receipt of subscriptions for this purpose,
which would seem to indicate that the
project had not then been abandoned. In
May, 1866, however, a new organ was
erected in the old church 54 which would
scarcely have been done had they not by
that date decided to continue there. This
decision was arrived at, presumably, because
the difficulty experienced by Father
Lawrence in securing ground-space adjacent
to the old chapel, had been overcome, since
we find that in l867 some property was
acquired from Messrs. Jameson, the distillers.
The friars lost no time in setting about
building a new church; the foundation
stone was laid on 12 June, 1868, by Archbishop
Cullen. The sermon on that occasion
was preached by the famous Dominican
preacher, Father Tom Burke. The church
was built in sections, the sanctuary portion
being built first. The late Father Paul of
Freshford in Recollections, written down by
him, states that a great part of the church
was built by direct labour, without a
contractor, but with a clerk of works
supervising the tradesmen in carrying out
the instructions of the architect-"and a
most expensive system this was". A
contracting firm was employed to complete
the undertaking. This-together with lack
of funds-in all probability explains why
the construction took so long. The facade
was not completed until 1882. In that year
-the seventh centenary of the birth of
Saint Francis-on 4 October, his feast-day,
the church was solemnly dedicated by
Cardinal McCabe, archbishop of Dublin,
and the preacher was again Father Tom
Burke, O.P.
While all this was in progress, more
ground-space became available which prepared
the way for the building of a new
friary adjacent to the church, and although
plans for this were made ready as early as
1875, the building was not finished until
the end of 1882, or perhaps the beginning
of 1883, when the community left North
King Street and took up residence in
Church Street.55
The intervening years have seen further
developments in both church and friary and
their surroundings. One who was involved
in much of this development was Father
Nicholas Murphy, a native of Kinnagh,
County Wexford. He had entered the
Order at Le Mans, France, then a novitiate
for the Irish custody. The first three or four
years after his ordination he ministered in
Cork. At the reconstitution of the province
in l885 he was assigned, as vicar, to the
Dublin community, of which he shortly
afterwards took charge when the guardian,
Father Bernard, requested to be relieved of
office. By then, of course, the church and
friary had been built but the lack of any
extra ground, apart from the sites on which
these buildings stood, was a great inconvenience.
Father Nicholas set about
rectifying this situation. In 1885 he
succeeded in acquiring the area now
occupied by the garden attached to the
friary. In doing so he not only rendered a
service to the community but effected a
transformation of the locality, for that
particular area was no beauty spot at the
time. Father Nicholas was responsible also
Sketch of proposed new church by J. J. McCarthy, R.H.A., F.R.I.A.I. The foundation stone
was laid, 12 June, 1868; the dedication took place on 4 October, 1882. The spire was never built.
Father Nicholas Murphy.
for some additions to the church and friary
such as the present sacristy, and the choir of
the religious. The extension of the Father
Mathew Hall, stretching down Church
Street, is due to him as well. However, it
was not these activities that gained Father
Nicholas the reputation of being a saintly
priest-it was, rather, his work in the
church, especially his devotion to the
confessional which was a marked feature of
his ministry. He had more than a passing
interest in the Third Order of Saint Francis - and
the attention he gave it, and his zeal in
promoting it, brought it to a very
flourishing state. Father Nicholas died on
the feast of All Saints, 1923, in the sacristy,
immediately after he had celebrated Mass.
In the early years of this century, the
Corporation of Dublin, through what was
called the Church Street and Beresford
Street Scheme, succeeded in transforming
the whole area in the vicinity of the
Capuchin church, and in the bringing
about of these improvements for the
welfare of the people of the district, the
Capuchins played a notable part. The friar
most prominent in this connection was
Father Nicholas. For years he haunted the
city hall, interviewing the authorities,
presenting petitions, statements and plans,
and often appearing before the Improvements
Committee, until his perseverance
eventually met with success. In tribute to
these efforts of his, his name is given to one
of the avenues off the street.
But to get back to the church and
friary-continuing the work of Father
Nicholas, and largely because of it, later
superiors have, as the need arose, made
extensions to the church and friary; the
former has been enlarged by the addition
of the Sacred Heart and Third Order
chapels, whilst to the friary itself a new
wing was added in the guardianship of
Father Charles Brophy. Later still, the
erection of a modest office for the mission
work and one for the Capuchin publications,
as well as the fitting up of a centre for
the work of the social guilds, have
completed the structural complex as we
know it today.
However, these developments, desirable
and necessary as they have been, were far
from the thoughts of the friars one hundred
years ago, who, in 1883, must have been
greatly relieved to see the completion of
the church and, what was even more
significant for themselves, a permanent
home in the spot in which the members of
the Order had worked for one hundred and
seventy years or more. As in the case of so
many other enterprises of a like nature
which characterized that period of Irish
church life, one has to admire the faith and
courage of the clergy who undertook them
and the generosity of a faithful people who
supported them, at a time when Irish
Catholics were poor, indeed, and means of
support were not readily forthcoming.
Church Street, then as now, could not be
described as an affluent area of the city. In
the middle of the last century it was a
populous, overcrowded, and extremely
poor area-apt ground for the exercise of a
Franciscan apostolate. It was here that the
Capuchins had finally established themselves
in Dublin and ministered among its
people. Some reference has already been
made to earlier friars, but at the period of
which we speak we find other men who
left their mark on the area and their names
in the hearts of the people.
There was Father David Ashe-in
religion, Father Thomas, who did so much
for the poor of Church Street and who was
especially well known for his efforts to
relieve their hardships during the Famine of
1847-48 and in the years which followed.
One who in his time knew Father Ashe
said of him that "he was killed in the
famine" -meaning by this that he seriously
injured his health by his exertions on behalf
of the poor. Unable to pay their rent or
their way, the poor were forced to leave
their places, several families were huddled
together in every room, destitute and
starving, the prey of the "soupers" who
had set up a centre nearby. Father Ashe
adopted various means for social relief,
amongst which was the setting up of a
shirt factory in the neighbourhood which
gave a good deal of employment, but
which in the end came to grief through the
dishonesty of a merchant. A native of Cork,
Father Ashe entered the Order at Rieti, not
far from the homeland of Saint Francis, in
the year l831; most of his priestly life was
spent in Dublin among the poor. He died
in 1877.
The most distinguished, perhaps, and,
certainly, the most popular of the Capuchins
at this time in Dublin was Father Daniel
Patrick O'Reilly. A native of Castlepollard,
County Westmeath, he entered the Order
at Bruges in l850. He was a man of many
gifts and talents-a fine presence, of a
genial, open-handed disposition. A renowned
preacher, he was considered by
Father Daniel O'Reilly.
some to be the rival of the famed Father
Tom Burke, O.P., and was much in
demand. Almost the first thirty years of his
life as priest were passed in Church Street,
of which community he was several times
superior, and for much of that long period
his energies were directed towards the
building of the new church. Father
O'Reilly was one of those who succeeded
in obtaining some extra ground-space,
which eventually made the building
possible. Because the Charity School, as it
was called, which catered for the education
of about forty poor children was not
adequate for the purpose, he secured a site
in North Brunswick Street and had the
school transferred there; in 1862 he vested
this school in the National Board, remaining
its manager until 1883. During all this
period Father O'Reilly was the "hero" of
Church Street-the people idolised him;
he was their pride, their joy and their
glory; no matter who was superior, he was
to them. the leading man in the community,
he was "their man".
Father O'Reilly lived through chequered
times in the history of the Irish Capuchins;
he saw the ancient province lose its status
and become a commissariate, and then a
custody-and, finally, a province again, in
1885. To that happy outcome he
contributed in no small measure; twice he
was provincial custos and his greatest
achievement was his success, during his
first term of office, in having a novitiate
re-established in Ireland, in the year 1875
where it has since remained. This event, of
n1omentous import for the future, hastened
the reconstitution of the province, so it was
very fitting that when the first Irish
administration of the newly re-established
province was appointed by the general
superiors, in 1877, Father O'Reilly was one
of the new provincial superiors.
Father O'Reilly died in Dublin on
2 September, 1894, in his sixty-third year
and is buried in Glasnevin. The pulpit in
the Capuchin church, Dublin, honours his
memory. Before the church was dedicated,
his many admirers wished to testify their
appreciation-and the pulpit, fittingly
enough for such a distinguished preacher,
was the form they chose. The pulpit has an
interesting history. It had been designed and
executed by Messrs. O'Neill and Sons,
Great Brunswick Street (now Pearse Street)
and exhibited, as a specimen of their art at
an Exhibition of Irish Arts and Manufactures
organized in Dublin in 1882, where
it was awarded first place in the department
of ecclesiastical arts. Father Patrick's friends
put their eye upon it and presented it to
him. Father Columbus Maher in his diary
notes:
"1883: March 19:-new pulpit opened
in Dublin; Fr. Tom Burke, O.P. preached
the sermon on 'St. Joseph, Guardian of
the Word nude Flesh: the Pulpit,
Guardian of God's Word'. A grand
sermon!"
The carved head at the right hand end of
the chancel arch next to the altar of Saint
Francis (and viewed when facing the altar)
in the church of Saint Mary of the Angels,
Church Street represents Father O'Reilly.57
By the side of that same altar of Saint
Francis a tablet erected on the wall commemorates
Father Benvenutus Dortmans
who died in 1874. This priest was a native
of Holland and before coming to Ireland
had been provincial of the Dutch-Belgian
province. He was the great friend of the
down-and-outs of the Church Street
district and knew them all by name. He
died unexpectedly in the friary at North
King Street where he was vicar. The day
his remains were to be brought from the
friary to the Church Street chapel it was
very wet and-there being then no
tarmac-the streets were very dirty. His
friends, the "down-and-outs", as a tribute
of respect, got together, cleaned and swept
the roadway, and had it spotless as the
funeral cortege passed.
Father Benvenutus was succeeded as
vicar in the Dublin friary by Father Louis
Hennessy whose comparatively short time
was characterized by much social activity to
help the poor, and in working to extend the
Third Order amongst the people. As
guardian of the community from 1876, he
set himself to relieve the community of the
heavy burden of debt arising from the
building of the church; amongst other
things he organized a successful bazaar
which was held in the Rotunda. These
activities proved too much for his never-too-
robust health; in the course of a visit
to the friary at Kilkenny, his native city, he
died there after a few days illness and is
buried in the friary church where he has so
often served Mass as a boy.
Father Hennessy was succeeded as
superior in Dublin by another Kilkenny
man, Joseph Harkins. Father Harkins had
been received into the Order in l868 at
Pantasaph, Wales. The Irish and English
Capuchins had been constituted into one
general commissariate the year before.
Joseph Harkins was a man of exceptional
intellectual genius and a brilliant student,
but-like many geniuses-impulsive and
temperamental. As he had completed the
usual course of studies before reaching the
canonical age for ordination, he was sent to
France for further training. It would seem
that after his ordination, he taught
philosophy there, for in a letter addressed
to the minister-general in 1881 he describes
himself as ''one-time lector of philosophy in
France, now guardian of Dublin.'' He
became guardian of Dublin in 1880, when
superiorship of that community was an
unenviable position. The community was
heavily involved in debt, and the work of
building the friary had been suspended for
lack of funds. Father Joseph, with great
difficulty, succeeded in raising a loan, at high
interest, to enable him to carry on, and he
had the satisfaction of seeing the building of
the friary completed before he sought to be
relieved of the office of superior; it would
seem that the worries and pre-occupations
attendant on his achievement were not
for one of his temperament. Had he
remained in Ireland he would undoubtedly
have attained to high distinction as a
preacher, an apostolate for which he was
en1inently endowed, but, in l884, he offered
his services as a missionary in India. At the
time of his death he had charge of the
Meerut mission. The present writer recalls
visiting his grave, some years ago, in the
cathedral of Agra where he died in 1888 at
the early age of thirty-five years.
The presence in the community of a man
like Brother Anthony Cooney must have
been a great comfort and help to any of the
superiors, pre-occupied as they were with
the burden of debt. At a time when brothers
were few and far between, Brother
Anthony made his presence felt in the
Friary and outside it, for he became very
well known as an assiduous questor of alms
in and around Dublin-a worthy forerunner
of the later Brothers Elzear and
Aiden and the present-day Brother
Lawrence ! A record of the time describes
him as "a most estimable brother in the
community ... who laboured incessantly
to collect money towards the debt on the
church and who never missed a favourable
opportunity of raising a few shillings ... ". 58
I am sure the superior would have wished - to
adapt the saying of Saint Francis-that
he had a forest of such brothers! Brother
Anthony passed to his reward in l892 and
is buried in Glasnevin.
Father Albert Mitchel is a man that
deserves well of Church Street. He became
a Catholic in his youth; his father, a
Presbyterian, who is said to have become a
Catholic before he died, carried on an
extensive business as a comb manufacturer.
David Mitchel was received into the Order
at Bruges in 1850, taking the name of
Albert. After ordination he worked for
some years in Mauritius and in east London,
before coming to Dublin about 1873. He
held the office of provincial custos for four
years from 1875. His contemporaries
recognized in Father Albert a straightforward
honest man, a hard worker, and a
very saintly person. Three features
characterized his ministry-an ardent
devotion to the Sacred Heart, great zeal for
the promotion of the Third Order, and
dedication to the cause of Temperance. In
Church Street he established the sodality of
the Sacred Heart; for the benefit of
Tertiaries he translated from the French, in
which he was fluent, the Manual of the
Brothers and Sisters of the Third Order of
Penance. He it was, as an advocate of
Temperance, who inaugurated the revival
of Theobald Mathew's apostolate by establishing
the Total Abstinence Sodality in the
church in Dublin and opened, as a meeting
place for its members outside the church, a
Temperance Hall in Halston Street. Later
on, this hall was given up and another, the
Father Mathew Hall, was erected in Church
Street. The building in Halston Street had
been a Temperance Reading Room in the
days of Father Mathew. The hall became a
centre for all, clerical and lay, who were
concerned with Temperance in Dublin-it
also became a "sign of contradiction". At
that time in Dublin there was a good deal
of antipathy to the cause of Total
Abstinence-when Father Albert attempted
to resuscitate the ideals of Father Mathew.
When members attempted to hold public
meetings in the Rotunda in the early days
of the revival, the gatherings were often
disturbed and broken up by drunken thugs,
primed with drink-it was alleged-by
certain publicans to create disorder. Under
his zeal and labour the cause prospered until
he handed over its direction to Father
Columbus Maher. That the work he began
brought a blessing to many a home around
Church Street, there can be no doubt.
Were Father Mitchel with us today he
would undoubtedly be an ardent supporter
of the "Buy Irish!" campaign, for even in
those far-off days-perhaps by reason of his
family background-he was an enthusiastic
advocate of Irish industry. He never used
or wore anything else when Irish-made
goods were to be had. When the matter of
erecting the Stations of the Cross in our
church in Dublin arose, he saw to it that
the images were painted and erected by
Irish hands. It may have been his health,
which had begun to fail, that ultimately
decided him to accept a pressing invitation
from the Capuchin bishop, Torregiani, of
Armindale, in Australia to go work in that
diocese, where, in the office of vicargeneral,
he died in 1893. 59
Father Columbus Maher was the man
who took up the cause of Total Abstinence
revived by Father Albert Mitchel, and the
man who became most identified with it.
He raised the movement to a popular and
respected position in the society of the
Dublin of his time-and this, in itself, was
no small achievement. Through the work
which he did for Temperance Father
Columbus-as a reporter of the time
stated-was recognized without distinction
of class or creed as one of the most
influential powers for good in the city of
Dublin. For him the Temperance n1-ovement
was a necessary means towards a
social reform amongst the people, especially
amongst the poorer section of the community.
It was because of this that he
became an admired friend of the English
Cardinal Manning, who himself had done
much towards the betterment of the lot of
the working people in England.
Father Columbus knew the situation in
Dublin very well: he was born only a
stone's throw away from the Capuchin
church, in North Brunswick Street, opposite
the Richmond hospital. He had entered the
Order in Frascati in 1835 and made his
studies in Italy, but being yet too young to
be ordained priest, he was sent as a cleric in
major orders to the newly founded
Capuchin monastery of Pantasaph in North
Wales. He was ordained, by special dispensation,
by Doctor Goss in Liverpool in
1858. It was remarked at the time-with
what truth I do not know-that he was the
first priest of his Order to be ordained in
England since the Reformation. After
ordination he exercised the ministry for
some months in the missions of North
Wales, then served from Pantasaph, before
he was recalled to Ireland. An interesting
incident occurred, in his regard, when being
in Rome in the late l860's on business
connected with the Order, he was deputed
to meet the Irish Brigade that had arrived
at Ancona to swell the army of Pio Nono.
For subsequent dealings in Ireland with
volunteers for the defence of the Papal
States, he incurred for a time the unwelcome
attention of the British government.
Father Columbus promoted the cause of
Temperance, not by any kind of mass-enrolment
but by the constant enlisting of
individual members, with whom he, or
officials of the Association, continually kept
in touch, and for all members he stressed
the vital role of the spiritual and the need
of the supernatural helps to be obtained
through the reception of the sacraments.
One of his great efforts for the progress of
the movement was the erection of the
Father Mathew Memorial Hall in Church
Street which became the centre of the
crusade. He was the moving spirit behind
the erection of the statue in honour of Father
Mathew in O'Connell Street, Dublin.
Later generations are indebted to Father
Columbus for his Diaries, several of which
are preserved in our archives. They contain
many interesting items of information
regarding day-to-day happenings in his
lifetime. These he faithfully wrote up every
night before retiring to rest-even on the
night before his death which occurred
rather unexpectedly on the morning of
10 September, l894. The unusual esteem in
which he was held was manifested in his
funeral procession in which six thousand
marched, city traffic being re-routed and
places of business closed. For some years
afterwards, on the anniversary of his death,
the Temperance sodalities walked in commemorative
procession to his grave in
Glasnevin.
Around this time also-when youth
clubs were not the "in-things" they are
today, Father Benvenutus Guy inaugurated
Father Benvenutus Guy
the Catholic Boys Brigade, a boys' club,
which had its headquarters some distance
down Church Street from the church.
Under his direction and that of the Fathers
who succeeded him in charge, this club
developed into a very large and active
centre for the youth of the district-as we
can gather from newspaper reports of the
time-and flourished for many years.
One could not treat of the Dublin
Capuchins of this period and omit Father
Salvator (William) Corrigan, for so many
years a venerable figure. Father Corrigan
came to Church Street about 1859, at the
time when the project of building a new
church had begun to exercise the attention
of the friars seriously and he threw himself
wholeheartedly behind the campaign to
provide the means. He became the most
illustrious of all the "fund-raisers". Father
Corrigan begged from everyone he met - merchants,
tradesmen, professional men,
drovers, farmers, street-hawkers, apple-women,
cab-men, policemen, everybody!
He was accustomed to be out in the
morning shortly after four o'clock in the
markets, then held daily, in all sorts of
Father Salvator Corrigan.
weather, collecting from the buyers and the
sellers. In 1868 he was sent to the United
States-and whether it was that his
reputation had preceded him or not, the
people of Cork gave him a royal "send-off";
three steam boats escorted him down the
Lee to Cobh, with several smaller craft. He
often spoke with great satisfaction of this
in later life. Travelling round America was
a slower process then than now, and Father
Corrigan remained there for seven years.
As might be expected, an accomplished
beggar of alms such as he was, met with
opposition here and there-and he used to
tell of the occasion when a local pastor
objected to an appeal being made in his
church and he (Father Corrigan) stood outside
its precincts with a green collecting-bag
in his hand and took up more than if he
had been allowed full scope inside. Father
Corrigan's interest in raising funds for the
new church became so much identified with
the project in the minds of the people that
they were accustomed-and for long afterwards-
to refer to it as "Father Corrigan' s
church".
But if Father Corrigan was zealous in
collecting alms, he was equally generous in
giving. He had an exceptional compassion
for anyone in distress; around Church
Street he was the friend of everyone in
trouble; no matter what kind of character
he or she might be, once a person was in
difficulty, Father Corrigan spared no effort
to have things righted. The drunkard might
lose his job or ruin his little business
through drink- Father Corrigan would
collect from the neighbours sufficient to set
him on his feet again, and then when things
were going well again, would collect from
him for the church!
Within the community Father Corrigan
was for a long time considered to be, like
Melchisedech, " ... without genealogy who
had neither beginning of days ... nor
(apparently!) end of life ... ". Except for
the fact that he was known to be a Dublin
nun, for years nobody could tell where or
when he was born, and he possessed that
characteristic, usually accredited to women,
of being decidedly reticent about revealing
his age.
He was ordained at Bologna, Italy, in
l859. The first intimation that the Irish
friars had of his presence in the Order was
when a visitator general, on arrival in
Dublin, mentioned that he had met this
Irish student in one of our Italian communities.
Nobody in Dublin could tell who
he might be or knew of the circumstances
in which he entered the Order; as far as can
be ascertained, he was received at Frascati.
Later research revealed the fact that he was
born in the year 1835. Almost all Father
Corrigan's priestly life was spent in Dublin.
He saw the church and friary completed
and-since he lived to a ripe old age-paid
for, we hope! His greatest wish was to be
buried in the church-a common enough
practice in the past-but by the time he
passed to his reward in 1919 neither
ecclesiastical nor civil regulations allowed
of this, so he was buried in Glasnevin.61
Father Corrigan was the last survivor of
the Capuchins who bridged the era between
the earlier and the modern Church Street,
often few in number, who had lived
through difficult and unsettled times,
lodging here and there and frequently in
surroundings redolent of Franciscan
simplicity and poverty, ministering to the
people in their dilapidated old chapel - until
better times allowed them to enjoy
the amenity of a church adequate to their
needs and the haven of a permanent home.
The end of this transition period brings
me, too, to the end of this article, the scope
of which has been to trace the development
and progress of the Capuchins in Dublin
from the first precarious beginnings under
the leadership of Francis Nugent to their
present environment. We have followed
their peregrinations from one place to
another, the vicissitudes to which they were
subjected as they sought after a permanent
abiding-place, and have caught glimpses,
along the way, of some of those who
influenced events or left behind trace of
achievement in diverse aspects of Capuchin
ministry-forerunners of those who were
to come after them. Let it not be thought
that the Capuchins did not have amongst them some who, indeed, fell far short of the ideal, or even of the exemplary; being a community of men, they surely had, but I think it can be said that the credit of their worth has out-balanced the deficit of shortcomings and they have left behind them a high example of fidelity to the ideals of the Poverello and a notable record of Capuchin apostolate. The continuation of that tradition in the modern era, which began with the final and permanent establishment of the Capuchin church and friary in Church Street, is a theme worthy of another account. 

Material in Irish Capuchin Provincial Archives.

