Our visual environment is something
from which we cannot
escape. It is with us in all our
waking hours, indoors and out. It haunts
our dreams. The baby's first visual stimulus
may be the pattern of his mother's bright
overall. Throughout his life a kaleidoscope
of visual impressions will jostle for his
attention, telling him of order or of
confusion, of harmony or the lack of it in
his immediate visual world. These earliest
visual impressions will be perhaps his first
intimations of the attitudes of his community
to life, to nature, to man.
The visual environment of our group is,
then, an integral part of our existence; its
communications are instant, inescapable. It
offers the human mind all those images of
perceivable things which its conscious and
unconscious powers interpret and shape
into expressions of human thought and
feeling, into aids to living, into art. The
interpretation of the visual environment is
an important aspect of visual education,
which, like the study of art itself, is a
necessary part of the study of man.
Our visual environment is not just "of
now" or "of then". It is a continuum of
which the more obvious sections are the
"now". But we are not isolated in "the
now". We can discern the aspects of past
living that are still vital to our way of life
today. We can influence the pattern of our
environment, more or less, use the new
tools and technologies at our disposal to
help to make a more or less human and
harmonious visual environment for ourselves
and for our children.
It has frequently been said that the Irish
of today are visually undereducated. In the
sphere of modern formal visual education
in schools this may be true, though there
are signs that the situation is changing
rapidly. But much visual education, now,
as in past ages, is picked up unconsciously,
directly from the environment. Michelangelo
studied Latin at school. His earliest
visual education must have been picked up
in the yard of the stone-mason whose wife
was his nurse, in the churches and streets of
Florence, in the Medici gardens. Ireland,
which has known civilised living for nearly
four millennia, has a specially rich visual
heritage. Our countryside (pace Cromwell)
has not suffered the rapid changes undergone
by more urbanised areas during the
industrial revolution. Within thirty miles of
Dublin one can experience the functional
quality of a modern cement works,
compare it with medieval monastic
planning early and late and with the
astonishing art of the megalith builders, all
part of that visual environment, all linked
by many minor mutations of the pattern of
living. But this wealth, like our green fields,
is a commonplace of the Irish countryside,
obvious.
What may be less obvious, though signs
of it are scattered everywhere, is the fact
that over the last half century or more we
have seen in Ireland a significant rebirth of
public interest in the visual. This is the
more surprising since it followed a dark
night of visual confusion in the period of
building during the post-emancipation
years and afterwards. The absence of anything
that could be called a native religious
art and the long series of "unimaginatively
imitative" solutions offered to the many
building problems of the period are
evidence of the artistic rather than of the
economic poverty of that age.
It is not easy to date the beginnings of
the revival of interest in the visual. Perhaps
it began with Edward Martyn's Loughrea
Cathedral policy. It will be remembered
that he was instrumental in securing the
employment of Irish artists for the windows
and banners and carvings there. The
foundation by the artist Sarah Purser not
only of the Tur Gloine, a stained-glass
co-operative workshop, but also, in the
thirties, of the Purser-Griffith Scholarship
to enable Irish students to study the History
of Art abroad was important. It eventually
led to the foundation of influential Visual
Arts Departments in the two Dublin
universities. And, of course, Douglas Hyde
in the Gaelic League and Arthur Griffith in
Sinn Fein stimulated a climate of opinion
favourable to native poetry, literature and
the development of the visual arts.
But it is not really important to know
how exactly this reawakened interest began.
We see its results around us. There is a
ground-swell of interest in the preservation
and restoration of natural amenities, of
waterways, of churches, of fine houses:
Ballintubber Abbey, Holycross, the Rothe
House, Castletown, Riverstown, Hume
Street. Sales of eighteenth-century glass and
silver have soared. Ever since World War II
art dealers, art exhibitions large and small
and international loan exhibitions have
multiplied. National, municipal and
provincial galleries and museums have seen
a wave of increased attendance. Clubs and
societies are interested in art classes, art
lectures, tours of historic Ireland. Some of
the most beautifully illustrated books on
Irish art have been produced and they take
their place with the spate of good international
publications on art, architecture,
landscape and allied subjects. In all this it is
important to remember that the people
involved in most of this activity come
from all walks of Irish life. Everyone is
conscious of the appearance of his home
town. Village greens are ablaze with rose
borders and unexpected wayside gardens
smile at the passing motorist. Just recently
the people of Swords, a village a few miles
north of Dublin, raised a thousand pounds
through a one-day community pageant. It
is to be spent on the restoration of part of
Swords Castle, a feature of the village since
the middle ages. In Dublin the Tailors'
Hall was restored by voluntary effort and
in Cork people are going about the
preservation of Skiddy's Almshouse. In
Rothe House, Kilkenny, built in 1594
Merrion Square and Fitzwilliam Street, built in 1780
Ireland, too, the visual impact of the printed
page has not been forgotten and printers
and publishers like Colm O Lochlainn at the
"Three Candles" and Liam Millar at the
"Dolmen Press" have set a high artistic
standard in typography and book-production.
Perhaps it is just this reawakened aesthetic
sense (or is it pietas ?) which highlights the
instances of our visual neglect: the nettles
and wild rhubarb around an historic tomb,
the indiscriminate dumping of junk along a
peaceful country road. And here we have
the beginning of a problem in visual
education.
People are indeed alert to the importance
of the visual in everyday life, from various
motives. The image, in every sense, has
regained importance. The market is being
showered with everything from catchy
packet-designs to crudely representational
book-covers. The image "sells" and the
hoardings are often the source of much
visual confusion. And at times profit - motives
like " it sells more whiskey" or
"it's good for the tourist trade" are invoked
to justify good taste. The popular approach
to art has its own dangers and one must
insist that visual education is not something
that comes out of a tap or out of a popular
text-book. It is a personal effort to see the
world around us "in a wider dimension of
time", to understand something of the
subtle relationship between human life and
the visual world in which it is lived.
For Ireland it could be a bad thing if, at
this critical juncture, we came to depend
too much on ready-made "aids" to visual
education, formulae coming from larger
industrialized communities with problems
in many ways radically different from our
own. Our methods and our solutions
should arise from our own problems and
should reflect our own way of life. Visual
education, like education in its broadest
sense, starts with direct experience of human
life in the local environment. "The job of
education ... is to shape a particular child
belonging to a given nation, a given social
environment, a given historical age. . . .
Our chief duty consists in becoming who
we are ... (the educator's) chief task is to
shape man . . . to guide the evolving
dynamism through which man forms himself
as a man ... ''. And the Irish child should
be guided to find himself in the natural
context of Irish tradition. This tradition is
more directly accessible to us through
examples of its visual expression through
the ages than in any other way. Moreover,
contact with his visual heritage will
stimulate identification with the tradition
to which the child, whether he knows it
or not, is heir.
And where do we find the materials for
the sort of visual education which would
lead to informed public opinion on all the
visual aspects of living, on planning, on
product-design, and on art, leading
ultimately to the rise of a sound modern
Irish tradition in art and the crafts. The
materials are everywhere around, in nature
with its functional design from snail shell
and spider's web to the structure of Errigal
and Slievnamon, in birds' flight and the
growth of plants and trees, in the organic
growth of streets and villages, in ancient
towers and crosses, in urban and rural
building developments, in museums and
galleries, in the work of a Hone, a Connor,
a Healy, a Yeats. All this is not necessarily
associated with the teaching of art and
craft, though it may provide material for
the art class. It is very different from the
free, instinctive approach to materials and
textures which may produce only "shapeless
emotion, a product which is neither the
means nor the end of visual education",
and which is sometimes mistaken for art.
True visual education is tied to an awareness
of basic concepts. Rooted in the basic laws
of the world around us, and in the way in
which man has reacted to them, it leads to
a grasp of the significant in structural
pattern. It learns all the time from nature,
for man is a part of nature. In all this the
important thing is not "book knowledge"
but the creative exercise of seeing and
relating .... The foundations of the new
formal visual education, which would take
the place of the older, unconscious visual
contact with a living, organic tradition,
sensitive to local materials, to landscape, to
human needs, will present problems. The
preparation of textbooks of value for use
in the various regions could only follow a
Doorway and part of the chancel arch, Nuns'
Church, built in 1166
generation of research, of specialist fieldwork.
At present at least one body, Foras
Forbartha, is engaged on an advisory and
educational programme in the area of manmade
objects, especially buildings. It is
listing things worth preserving and tries to
help people see why quite simple things in
our visual heritage are worth preserving.
Awaiting the published results of such
surveys we may take heart and recall that
in the end, capacity to appreciate the visual,
to deal with life artistically "is not the
privilege of a few gifted experts . . . it
should ... belong to the equipment of every
sane person whom nature has favoured with
a pair of eyes . . . ". So, besides those
broadly interested in visual education,
besides the planners, the art teachers, the
botanists, the conservationists, our visual
heritage is everybody's business and
especially it is the business of parents, whose
example and interests so profoundly affect
their children. A conscious awareness of
the riches of one's own district is a first
step. Each area has its special local
characteristics and in each, one aspect or
another of our visual heritage of natural
and man-made things may dominate; in
County Antrim the rock-formation of the
Giant's Causeway, in the Boyne Valley the
art of the megalithic tombs, in Dublin the
pleasant harmony of the classical eighteenth-century
urban square, in Kilkenny the
craftsmanship of the medieval carver.
Obviously the rich visual material of such
areas is not to be "taught" along academic
lines, rather should the student be
encouraged to look, to record, to compare
and, in the case of man-made things, to
explore the character of the materials used,
to relate them to source and setting and
function, so as to come close to the mind
which created the carvings or the streetscapes
and to the natural setting which
influenced his mind.
But perhaps a recent experience will help
to illustrate the point made here. During
the summer I was with some students
engaged on an environmental study of
Clonmacnois. They walked the Esker, the
ridge of sandhills which stretches from
Dublin to the west and touches the Shannon
here at the site of Clonmacnois. They
walked the Shannon shore. They surveyed
and measured and drew the buildings. They
made a photographic record of the site, its
natural surroundings, its monuments. They
talked to the local people.
The historian would be quick to
remember that Clonmacnois bulked large
in the life of Ireland for well over a thousand
years, from the time of its foundation by
Ciarin mac a'tsaoir in the sixth century,
while the builders of Constantinople were
still working on Santa Sophia, to the
sixteenth century, the period of its dissolution.
Following his early death Ciarán's
tomb became the centre of a pilgrimage
and the cemetery of Clonmacnois a necropolis
for the ruling families east and west
of the Shannon.
"Fifty kings, tis no small portion,
have come to thee, O cemetery!"
And so, the monastery was enriched and
beautified; scribes and metalworkers in
bronze and stone carvers worked there. In
the tenth century, when the Viking raids
had eased, the Cross of the Scriptures was
erected in memory of the High King,
Flann Sinna. About 1100, during the
literary revival that followed Brian
Boroimhe's victory at Clontarf, the scribe,
Maelmhuire, grandson of Conn na mBocht,
wrote in the Book of the Dun Cow
(Leabhar na hUidhre) the oldest surviving
text of the already classical Tain epic. The
metal workshops of the century were
making the Clonmacnois Crozier-shrine
and the stone carvers were working on the
lovely door and chancel arch of the Nuns'
Church. The elegant tower of Finian's
chapel was built too, for this was the period
when the Irish romanesque style was in full
flower. Even after the coming of the
Normans, life continued at Clonmacnois,
and scholarship flourished. The tenthcentury
cathedral was more than once
enlarged and even in the fifteenth century
a gothic north doorway, moulded and
ornamented with carvings which set Saint
Patrick between Saints Francis and Dominic,
was erected by the Dean, Odo or Aedh
Ó Maoileoin. Even the suppression under
Henry VIII was not the end. The cemetery
was still the burial place of the descendants
of the old kingly patrons, O Connors,
O Kellys, O Melaghlins and the pilgrimage
to the founder's tomb became an annual
pattern on the feast of Ciarán, 9 September.
So much for annalist and archaeologist.
What exactly does Clonmacnois offer to
the eye of the twentieth-century viewer?
Apart from the romantic and picturesque
Knowth, Co. Meath, Tumulus Stone, discovered
in 1967. Tumulus dates from 2000 B.C.
to 350 B.C.
Saint Flann' s Cross, Scripture Cross, east face
Clonmacnois.
values of ruined towers reflected in the
waters of the Shannon, how can such a site
be used as a basis of visual education?
Here it should be stressed that a site like
Clonmacnois is not, of course, to be seen as
a manifestation of something long since
dead. Nor is it a repertory of quaint image to
be reproduced "for the tourist". Like all
surveys of human activity, the study of its
remains should offer visually a wider and
deeper sense of living.
But what does one "go out into the desert
to see" at Clonmacnois? A scattering of
ruined churches, worn crosses, stubbornly
standing towers?
The City of Clonmacnois, the ramparts,
the mills, the scriptoria, the workshops, the
farm-buildings, the guest-house of the
abbot have all disappeared. Only churches
and carved stones remain, the churches only
in part. These with a few battered products
of the workshops and the scriptoria are our
visual remains of a thousand years of life.
A visual examination of the surviving
fragments shows us that it would be
simplistic to think that a lack of visible
planning implies that the builders of
Clonmacnois did not organize space but
built chapels and cells haphazardly from
age to age. The medieval cities and towns
of Europe, too, took centuries to build but
as long as traditions of life and craftsmanship
remained, there existed a kind of
impersonal or maybe supra-personal
creativity, which depended less on
individual genius than on the "general
will" of an integrated community. The
written as well as the visual records of
Clonmacnois point to such an integrated
community.
A visitor today, like the pilgrim of four
hundred years ago, if he does not come by
water, may approach the monastic city
along the old pilgrims' road, continued
along a narrow stc»i1e path ("the causeway")
still visible in the grass of the cemetery. The
churches, five of them, are grouped in a
very clear way round the cathedral, two
to the north, three to the south. They are
placed on the highest part of the site and are
so positioned that only the eastern gables
are visible from the pilgrims’ road. From a
distance the cathedral with its fifty foot
high gable would have dominated the
group. It gradually recedes, till the smallest
chapel of all takes its place, blocking the
cathedral’s impact by its position on the
edge of what seems to be a man-made
earthen platform, the "plinth" on which
the churches rest. This small chapel, the
founder's tomb, may have been at the
centre of the original monastic settlement.
On the ascent to the churches the eastern
gable of the cathedral with its projecting
antae again dominates. Coming round to
the doorway in the western gable of Temple
Ciarán, one is struck by the almost town-like
proximity of the buildings to one
another. From there a narrow "street"
formed by the cathedral and the remains of
Temple Kelly lead from Ciarán’s Church
to the space before the western door of the
cathedral, to the area where the Cross of
Flann stands. From the Shannon the main
surviving crosses of "Ciarán's plain of
crosses" would have been deafly visible
before the growth of the modern shelter - belt
of trees. On the edge of the rising
ground, Rourke's Tower offered protection
from attacks by water.
What keeps the buildings of this group,
erected from time to time over a period of
eight hundred years, from clashing with
one another?
Perhaps the most unifying factor is the
material used in their construction; uncoursed
limestone rubble of an overall grey
tone, relieved by warm creamy sandstone
in doorways, slabs, high crosses. One may
assume the reddish brown of oak and yew
shingles on the roofs. These were the chief
materials used all through the building
period, stone and wood. They provided
textual unity. They were drawn from the
locality. The shape and orientation of the
churches is also important. All are oriented
left: Temple Ciaran.
below: l-r The Cathedral Temple
Doulin and Temple Hurpain.
east-west and are of a simple, sculptural
shape, rectangular in plan, that makes one
aware of the quality of the space around
them.
The most important element, however,
is the use of the site itself. Standing south
of the group, we see how Temple Ri, by its
siting about ten feet higher up the slope
than the cathedral, is saved from being
completely dominated by that building.
And again, the narrowness of the passage
round the cathedral itself cuts off the impact
of its relatively high roof.
The carved sandstone grave-slabs now
in the open-air museum, but once scattered
through the cemetery, still evoke the subtle
skill of the Clomnacnois carvers. What was
carved or painted on wood or woven and
embroidered in wool or linen we can never
know.
In the fourteenth century the poet Angus
O Gillan saw these carved stones too and
for him they recalled the history of noble
lines of kings from east and west of the
broad river.
And long after O Gillan, his nineteenth-century
translator, Rolleston, from the
Shannon country, felt again the peculiar
atmosphere of that place and saw the
astonishing light there.
In a quiet water'd land, a land of roses
Stands Saint Kieran's city fair
And the warriors of Erin in their famous
generations slumber there.
There beneath the dewy hillside sleeps the
noblest the clan of Conn.
Each below his stone with name in branching
Ogham
And the sacred knot thereon.
There as black-caps twitter on the slopes
of the Esker and grebes and seafowl plash
and call along the rushy shore, one can see
again what O Gillan saw as he wrote. The
poet's original Irish lines are best, even if
they are almost untranslatable:
Cathir Chiarain Cluain Mic Nois
Baile drucht-sholuis dearg-rois.
The scattered stones of Ciarán's City are
still "dew-bright, rose-red".
But Clonmacnois is only one among the
innumerable visual treasures of Ireland,
north and south. A whole scheme of visual
education might be based on such a site.
There is so much to see and understand:
the natural setting, the materials and
textures used, the simple, clearly-defined
shapes of slabs, crosses and buildings ...
anyone can make his own list. But the aim
behind such a visual study is not that of the
historian, nor of the poet, though both
history and poetry may sometimes reveal
themselves. It is to educate the eye, so that
we may live in our environment as the
seeing, not as the blind. Such a training of
the "thinking eye" would lead surely to
the end of that visual deprivation which
arose in Ireland, not from the Industrial
Revolution, or from the dominance of the
profit-motive in production, but over
years when the normal patronage of nobles
and clergy passed out of the hands of the
Irish and the enriching experience of living
centres, manor houses, monasteries, parish
churches was sharply broken, leaving an
attenuated craft tradition. Soon the skills of
craftsmen were diverted to the service of a
new "gentry" whose developing culture
turned more to the written word than to
music and the image.
The image has again become an
important means of communication. A
painter like Jack Yeats, deeply involved in
the Irish environment, has created in his
paintings some of the images in which
today's Ireland may again recognise herself.
Perhaps, now that the peoples of Ireland
have once again grown together in common
living, we are on the verge of a fruitful
return to the heritage of our environment,
to nature and to man, for we are men, and
man, like the artist, is "himself nature and
part of nature in natural space".
