This year is the centenary of the
insurrectionary movement known as
the Paris Commune. In these pages, I
intend to study Irish opinion on, and Irish
connections with, this movement. To
different people the Commune has a
different significance. The movement was
hailed by Marx and Lenin. Marx wrote
that "Workingmen's Paris with its Commune
will be for ever celebrated as the
glorious harbinger of a new society. Its
martyrs are enshrined in the great heart of
the working-class. Its exterminators' history
has been already nailed to the eternal pillory
from which all the prayers of their priest
will not avail to redeem them." To other
writers, including our own John Mitchel,
the Commune was not the revolution of the
proletariat, it was merely the result of an
exasperated Republican Paris revolting
against a reactionary, unrepresentative,
National Assembly of monarchist rural
squires. Others see this revolt as the
inevitable outcome of the humiliating defeat
of France by Prussia in the war of 1870-71,
a defeat made certain by the vacillating
Government of National Defence, itself the
product of an insurrection.
The debate goes on to this day, but these
points at least are clear:-The National
Guard (or People's Militia of Paris) in
union with a mainly middle-class group of
journalists, lawyers and soldiers separated
the city of Paris from the rest of France
from the middle of March to the end of
May, 1871. They installed a revolutionary
government there and afterwards established
a commune by popular vote and
clearly envisaged an extension of the
revolution throughout France. From the
outset, divisions became apparent among
the revolutionaries. On one hand, the
Central Committee of the National Guard,
which had initiated the revolt, vied with
the elected Commune. Within the Commune
itself the struggle continued between
those who looked back to the Great
Revolution and wished to relive the
Jacobinism of 1793, and between those
social revolutionaries who looked forward	
to a new era of happiness for the common
man. Absence of effective leadership, and
policies, in the political and above all in the
military sphere, led to the eventual defeat
of the Commune by forces of the National
Assembly under the command of the
French soldier of Irish descent, Marie
Patrice Edme Macmahon, duc de Magenta.
The suppression of the Commune by M.
Thiers, the French Premier, and by
Macmahon was one of the most bloody
episodes in recent world history, and ranks
with Auschwitz and Hiroshima as a
reminder of the savagery of human nature.
As well as losing the lives of over 20,000 of
her sons and daughters, some of the most
noble monuments of Paris lay in charred
ruins in June, 1871. The Communards
when pressed by the forces of the Assembly
adopted the policy of the citizens of
Moscow when their city fell to Napoleon.
They destroyed their conquered city by
fire.
The bravery and disregard for personal
safety shown by the rank and file of
defenders of the Commune has become a
well-established fact of history. At the last
stand at the barricades, women were no
whit less brave than men.
The Commune movement was distinguished
by a most virulent anti-religious
fervour. This manifested itself by the
decrees adopted by the revolutionary
government suppressing state aid to the
Church and decreeing the separation of
Church and State. Churches were
requisitioned and became the headquarters
of revolutionary clubs where dishevelled
orators harangued the crowd from the
pulpit. "Scandals" were concocted in the
revolutionary newspapers to demonstrate
the perfidity of priests and nuns. Above all,
the Commune's blackest deed was the
execution of the saintly prelate, Archbishop
Darboy of Paris. This execution made the
name of the Commune obnoxious to many
fair-minded persons everywhere, and made
them turn a blind eye to the massacres and
deportions of Adolphe Thiers.
It was to be expected that the Ireland of
1871 would interest herself in these
tumultuous happenings in Paris. Ireland had
followed the course of the Franco-German
war with great sympathy for the French
cause and had sent human and material aid
to the distressed nation. Two aspects of the
Paris Revolution affected the Irish assessment
of the movement. To us in Ireland a
militantly anti-Catholic movement recalls
the ravages of Cromwell and the horrific
dark years after the defeat of the Boyne.
Our instinct is to abhor such a movement.
The agents of Monsieur Thiers were, of
course, very happy to emphasise the antireligious
nature of the Commune in order
to give the movement an infamous reputation
in other European countries.
The second important factor to note
regarding Irish opinion on the Commune
was that in the eyes of the majority of Irish
Nationalists the insurgents of Paris (and of
the other less enduring Communes of
France) were in arms against that most
sacred institution, the French Republic.
The despot, Napoleon III, had been overthrown.
The Republic had succeeded in
making peace after the disastrous imperial
war. The voice of the people had spoken in
their choice of a National Assembly. Then
the rebels struck. Who could these creatures
be who struck at that bleeding and broken
figure of France, already weary from her
struggle with cruel Prussia? At best, they
might be Bonapartist trouble-makers. At
worst, they could be motivated by Prussian
gold. So argued Nationalist Ireland. Again,
we may note that Monsieur Thiers would
stifle all excuses for the Commune with this
same argument and used it to such effect as
to rally to his side much of French Left-wing
opinion. It was a story which
travelled well.
The leading Irish churchman of the day
was the Archbishop of Dublin, Paul
Cardinal Cullen. Outspoken in his
opposition to Fenianism, Cardinal Cullen
was looked upon with disfavour by extreme
Irish Nationalists of the time. In a Pastoral
Letter reported in The Nation (Dublin) of
6 May, 1871, the prelate spoke out strongly
in the following manner against the
revolutionary government then installed in
Paris:-
"Unhappily, for a long time past, the
men who had the government of that great
Catholic country, France, in their hands
were hostile to religion and laboured
assiduously to undermine its foundations.
Statues were erected to Voltaire, the
blasphemer of Our Divine Lord; infidel
teachers were placed over the principal
schools, Catholic teaching was placed under
a ban, immorality and irreligion were
encouraged, and anti-Christian clubs,
Freemasonry, and other secret and
dangerous societies were established under
public authority. As a bad tree cannot
produce good fruit, we should not be
surprised that the policy referred to has
brought on in Paris a system of violence,
robbery and assassination and has renewed
all the dreadful scourges which we read of
in the history of the siege of Jerusalem under
Titus. It is to be hoped that the small but
desperate faction which has involved a great
people in such misfortunes will soon receive
condign punishment. As for ourselves, we
should be most thankful to God for having
preserved us from the evils with which
France is afflicted and saved us from being
subjected to that bloody despotism which
now prevails in Paris. Our gratitude for
these benefits will be increased when we
reflect that the very man who is now producing
such terror in Paris and filling its
streets with blood, General Cluseret, came
over to Ireland some years ago to put himself
at the head of our own Fenian bands. If
they had been successful, even for a
moment, seeing what has been done in
France, we can easily imagine to what
condition our poor country would be
reduced under the sway of a dictator so
reckless and so desperate."
Most of the Irish press, Nationalist and
Unionist, was as much opposed to the Paris
insurrection as was Cardinal Cullen.
The Nation (Dublin) was under the
control of the Irish Nationalist, author and
parliamentarian Alexander Martin Sullivan,
in l871. Solidly pro-French during the
recent war with Germany, Sullivan had
been one of the prime movers in the
organization of Irish aid to France. In an
editorial in The Nation of 8 April, l871,
p. 329, he made dear his opinion of the
Communards :-
"We hope that no Irishman will
endeavour to excite in this country any
degree of sympathy with the aims or the
acts of these wretched men. Between our
cause and theirs there is neither connection
nor similitude; our principles and theirs are
wide as the poles asunder. We seek for
rational liberty, not for the destruction of
society; we desire freedom consistent with
peace and progress, and sanctified by
religion; we are willing to be ruled by a
government chosen by the voice of our
countrymen; we do not seek to make a mere
faction rulers of the destinies of our land.
Therefore, we have nothing in common
with the Parisian insurrectionists, and their
movement has no claim on our regard. Any
attempt to induce our people to look with
favour on the misconduct of those men, any
attempt to find excuses for the massacres
and assassinations of which they have been
guilty, would be a crime against Ireland.
There is a lesson for Irishmen, and for all
peoples, in the lamentable events which
have taken place in Paris, but that lesson is
not set forth when apologies are made for
the anarchists who have reddened the streets
with the blood of their fellow-citizens,
plundered the homes of honest and
industrious men and profaned Christian
temples. It is set forth when those events are
pointed to as a warning against the spirit of
faction and of irreligion, and as showing
the wisdom and the necessity of cohesion,
tolerance, forbearance and patriotic union
among sons of the same land".
In the pages of The Nation also we find an
argument against the fighting spirit of the
Communards. Where (asks Sullivan) were
these fearsome Communist firebrands when
the Prussian foe stood at the gates of Paris.
They dared not lift arms to defend their
country and slunk into cellars to hide. Now,
however, that France lies broken and
bleeding these "patriots" emerge to defy
the will of the people and flaunt their
bravery. The Parisian rebels, says The
Nation, must be subdued by a man of the
calibre of General Cavaignac, who crushed
the Paris revolt of May, 1848.
The most influential Irish nationalist
newspaper for well over a hundred years,
The Freeman's Journal, had no word of
sympathy for what it called "the Sans-Culottes
of 1871" and their "abominable
doctrines." To Edmund Dwyer Gray, the
enterprising editor of the "Freeman", the
reign of the Commune meant the shooting
down of generals, the burning of palaces
and the murder of ecclesiastics.
Though The Freeman's Journal and The
Belfast News-Letter might frequently be at
loggerheads regarding Irish affairs, their
editorial writers spoke with one voice of the
Paris insurgents as "those assassins who go
under the name of Reds" (The Belfast
News-Letter, March 18, 1871-Editorial).
However, the "News-Letter" went a step
further and made a plea that was to be taken
up by a section of the Irish provincial press.
Said the editorial of March 18 :-"Every
one sees now that the Republic will not be
able to control the troublesome spirits.
Paris ... is a whitened sepulchre, a moral
sink that must be cleansed before any form
of government can obtain stability .... " It
goes on to prophesy the return of Napoleon
III with an "empire liberal" of some kind.
The Irish Times has for long had an
influential role in Irish journalism. In its
assessment of the Franco-German War and
the ensuing Commune it displays a sense of
balance lacking in its contemporaries. In
The Irish Times editorial of 29 May, 1871, it
calls the Commune "the most terrible of
the insurrections of Paris." It continues that:
"There is no use in disparaging the courage
of the opponents of M. Thiers. They fought
with reckless and desperate fury. We trust
that there will be no massacre of the
prisoners now at Versailles".
The extreme Unionist Daily Express had
been scathing in its attacks on Irish
sympathy for France during the war of
1870-1871. An editorial on the Commune
in the issue of 20 March, 1871 is surprisingly
cool-headed and fair:-
"France is drawn in two contrary
directions, by her rural representatives, who
are ultra-conservative and ultra-orthodox,
and by the mob of Paris, who are exactly
the opposite. Between them lies the "tiers-parti",
represented by a small man who is
Voltairean at heart, but ready to lend himself
to any combination, Legitimist or
Republican, which will restore to France
her lost ascendancy." On 29 May, 1871, the
Express editorial accuses the Versailles
soldiers of "cowardice at first and cruelty
at last in dealing with the Commune".
James Connolly, the Socialist revolutionary,
who was a signatory of the Proclamation
of 1916, and gave his life in defence of
the Republic, praises the work of Richard
Pigott in radical journalism in Ireland,
before he "succumbed to the influence of
gold offered by The London Times." Pigott
has achieved the unenviable reputation in
Irish history of a traitor, because of his
famous forged letters which attempted to
blacken the character of Parnell.
In 1871, Pigott was the proprietor of two
Dublin newspapers of advanced Nationalist
tendencies, The Irishman and The Flag of
Ireland, and in his two papers he pleaded
for the men of the Commune in the teeth of
the hostility of the rest of the Irish press.
In an editorial in The Irishman, 25 March,
1871, the Commune uprising was described
as "Revolution replying to reaction."
Referring to the shabby record of the
Government of National Defence, the
Royalist intrigues and the insulting
language of Royalist journals towards the
ordinary citizens of Paris, The Irishman
says:-
"Circumstances did take place in Paris
calculated to cause much irritation and
excitement amongst the population. We do
not say that they were of sufficient gravity
to justify a revolution; but in considering
them, we can no longer feel surprise at it."
This editorial brought a letter of protest
from the Fenian leader, John O'Leary. The
letter dated "Antwerp, May 28, 1871" was
published in the next issue of The Irishman.
O'Leary took the paper to task for having
"at least a tendency to justify the late
senseless and criminal doings in Paris." The
editor's comment on O'Leary's letter was
to observe that "Marseillaise", a paper
representative of Communal feeling, had
been the only French paper to plead for the
rights of Irish revolutionaries when they
had been confined "in the prison pens of
England".
Pigott's other paper, The Flag of Ireland,
gave greater prominence to the Commune
rising, and was less measured in its language.
In its editorial of 25 March, 1871 The Flag
said of the Paris insurgents:-
"Whether they succeed or fail, their
revolution will not be deficient of good.
What France wants now is an earnest and
energetic and a pure Republic. The 'Reds',
with all their faults, are earnest and all the
energy of the nation seems to concentrate
in them. They desire a pure Republic,
though they may not have the power to
accomplish it."
The Flag of Ireland of l April, 1871,
stressed in its editorial :-"What the Reds
demand is simply an end to the reign of
dynasties and intrigue and a beginning to
the reign of popular liberty."
Later in the issue of 15 April, 1871, an
editorial denounces the unfortunate alliance
which it alleges had existed in France as in
Ireland, between the Catholic Church and a
despotic regime. Because of its endorsement
of Napoleon III and his oppression, the
French clergy were now suffering humiliation
and imprisonment at the hands of the
Commune, says Pigott.
When the Commune had been put down
in bloodshed and horror, The Flag of
Ireland spoke out on 3 June, 1871 :--
"If Thiers had been the real advocate of
Republican freedom, instead of the
unconscious tool of the monarchical
reaction, he might have saved France from
the untoward calamity which has now
blotted her history. . . ." "From the
beginning of the contest, the Versailles
government has treated the Parisians, not
as citizens looking for reform and armed
for the protection of their liberties but as
ungovernable outlaws to be hunted to
death or to surrender."
The biographer of Pigott says that the
editor was not beyond writing letters to his
own newspapers under pseudonyms. A
correspondence on the subject of the
Commune began in The Flag of Ireland of
1 April, 1871. This correspondence consisted
of a controversy regarding the
Commune between what one would
today call a "Red" Irish Republican
("Spartacus ") and a "Green" Irish
Republican ("Saersi"). The letters are long
and the points of controversy well argued.
The pros and cons of the French rising and
its relevance to the Irish struggle are brought
out in letters appearing up to the fall of the
Commune. Might not both these arguments
be the clever work of Pigott himself?
The first letter from "Spartacus"
(Irishman, l April, 1871), notes that the
Dublin newspapers, Orange and Green
alike, now in full cry against the insurgents
of Paris, were the same organs which
condemned the Fenian insurrection some
years ago. Continues the writer:-
"It is a remarkable fact that whenever the
people, whether French 'Reds' or Irish
'Fenians' repudiate the leadership of kingly
cut-throats, aristocratic idlers, and plutocratic
plunderers, and attempt to move
forward under the guidance of men of their
own order, the movement is immediately
hailed with a concert of curses by the
'respectable' individuals of all sects."
The priests of France will oppose the
Commune as the Irish clergy opposed
Fenianism, according to "Spartacus":
" ... Some French priests may fall victims
to the popular vengeance .... Oh! who
will explain the cruel contradiction that
those who should be the foremost advocates
of popular rights are found in opposition
to every movement initiated by the
people?"
A letter from "Spartacus" appears in
The Flag of Ireland of l5 April. This time he
says that the French bishops are anti-Republican-"
the most learned and liberal
member of the hierarchy, Monsignor
Dupanloup is an Orleanist. The bishops
command the priests to preach down
Republicanism and they do so accordingly.
The peasants of France, being uneducated,
are unable to form political opinions of their
own and are guided in all political matters
by the priests. A similar state of things
existed in Ireland ... and we know that
before the cause of true nationality could
be advanced a single stage, the influence of
priests in politics had to be crushed. This
clerical intervention in politics resulted in a
Monarchist majority being returned to the
Versailles Assembly, according to the
writer, while "The Republican minority
represents the enlightened working-class of
the towns".
In The Flag of 22 April, l871, a letter
appears signed "Saersi" which condemns
the efforts of "Spartacus" to "confound
Fenianism with Red Republicanism" and
insists that the National Assembly of
Versailles represents the voice of the people
of France.
"Spartacus" replied to this letter in The
Flag of Ireland of 6 May, 1871. This letter
denies that the writer previously equated
Fenianism with Red Republicanism. He
merely pointed out that the same newspapers
which vilified the Fenians are now in
full cry against the Reds of Paris. He makes
the interesting observation :-"Fenianism is
the embodiment of two ideas, Nationality
and Republicanism, the latter being subordinate
to and almost annihilated by the
intensity of the former .... Fenianism does
not always mean the most moderate
Republicanism." Commenting on the
hostility of the French Catholic Church
towards Republicanism he notes:-
"Anyone who attempts to advocate the
cause of man without distinction of race,
colour, creed or class must expect to be
roughly handled by the respectable religious
folks." He ends by an exhortation not to
put "The green flag of Irish nationality
against the "drapeau rouge" of universal
republicanism."
"Saersi" replies in the next issue and
roundly condemns the religious persecutions
being carried out in Paris by the
Communards :-
"Does such conduct," he asks, "deserve
imitation in Ireland? If the day should
come ' ... when the Irish race, rising in its
might, shall at last expel certain tyrants, is
it desirable that there should be then in
Ireland other tyrants who, setting aside the
voice of the nation, would tell us that 'our
education was at a low ebb,' sack our
churches, imprison our priests, suppress
our newspapers, declare themselves justified
in establishing their form of government
against the will of the majority and
commence the reign of terror which the
Commune of Paris has entered on?
Assuredly not. It would be the substitution
of one tyranny for another."
However, "Spartacus " manages to have
the last word in the argument, and he
concludes in a letter in The Flag of Ireland,
27 May, 1871 :-
"The 'Reds' are the intelligent workingmen
of the towns of France who object to
be ruled by an ignorant priest-ridden
peasantry. They are conspirators and believe
in the blood and iron doctrine as all
conspirators do ... fighting to establish a
well-distributed thoroughly democratic
form of government."
Opinion regarding the Commune was
also divided among the newspapers
published by Irish nationalists in America.
The Irish World was founded by Patrick
Ford in New York in l870, the year before
the Commune of Paris came into being.
The paper prospered and is still being
published. It has done much to aid the cause
of Irish nationalism in America.
The Irish World was very hostile towards
the Paris revolution. The theme of its
editorial of 25 March, 1871, was that:
"Nothing but the boldest front and the
most rigid despotism on the part of Thiers
can save France now."
The Communards were "a few bold
audacious bad men, appealing to the
ferocious instincts of a bloody mob."
(Editorial, 8 April, 1871).
The Irish World’s last word on the
Commune appeared in the issue of 8 June,
1871:-
"We see before our eyes, demons in
human shape walking the earth outraging
humanity and spitting up blasphemy at the
God who made them."
"Yet we have an editor of an Irish-American
paper in New York who has
been praying for the success of these Reds!
Whether it was to God or to the Devil he
prayed we cannot say, but in neither case
has he been heard."
"It is gratifying to know, however, that
no full representative Irishman, no representative
of the faith of Catholic Ireland the
world over, has lifted a hand, or said a
word or written a line in advocacy of these
fiends."
Another New York Irish paper, The Irish
People, proclaiming itself devoted to "the
cause of Irish independence, the interests of
the Irish in America and the cause of
humanity" was in no way sympathetic to
the Commune. In common with much of
the French parliamentary Left, The Irish
People believed the Commune to be a great
danger to the Republic in France. Out of
the anarchy wrought by the Reds of Paris,
another despotic Bonaparte could climb to
power by playing on "le grande peur des
bien-pensants."
Only one Irish voice in New York spoke
up in favour of the Commune-John
Mitchel in his paper, The Irish Citizen. He
is undoubtedly the editor referred to in such
scathing terms by the Irish World. Mitchel,
a Northern Irish Protestant, was the most
extreme of the Irish revolutionaries of 1848.
Convicted of treason by the British, he had
been deported by them to Van Diemen's
land. His diary of imprisonment became
the Irish classic, jail journal. At length, his
escape from banishment was arranged by
Patrick Smyth. After his escape, Mitchel
lived for some time in Paris and afterwards
in the United States. To the end, his voice
was raised in defence of Irish freedom and
in denunciation of British oppression. He
was an eloquent writer and controversialist.
Many were shocked by his espousal of the
southern cause in the American civil war.
However, his country honoured him at the
very end of his life by returning him
unopposed as the representative of
Tipperary in the House of Commons,
though he never took his seat in that
assembly. Mitchel's fervour and ideals have
been guiding lights to Irish Republicans.
Padraic Pearse, the President of the Irish
Republic of 1916, and the father of modern
Irish Republicanism, had a high regard for
Mitchel. For Pearse, Mitchel was one of the
"four great minds" who had developed the
conception of an Irish nation in modern
times. The other three were Theobald
Wolfe Tone, Thomas Davis, and James
Fintan Lalor.
In The Irish Citizen's editorial of
25 March, 1871, the Commune insurrectionaries
were described as "The People - we
refuse to call them the Reds." The
Government of National Defence was
referred to as "dubious" and "characterless."
Further, in The Irish Citizen of 8 April,
1871, the editorial states that enemies of
France and many ignorant persons confound
the Paris Commune with socialism or
communism. The real meaning of the effort
of the Parisians may be only to establish a
genuine Republic, a security to France and
a menace to monarchical Europe.
In The Irish Citizen of 22 April, 1871,
Mitchel again asserts that Germany is behind
the scurrilous efforts to equate the
Commune with Socialistic Communism.
He says these efforts are "a libel carefully
kept up, repeated and harped upon by the
enemies of French Republicanism, precisely
as the English press thinks fit to nickname
Irish nationalists Fenians."
In its issue of 6 May, 1871, The Irish
Citizen editorial, takes to task the "genteel
American press" and "English flunkey
correspondents" for fabricating stories of
frightful atrocities perpetrated on the clergy
of France by the Communards. Mitchel
admits certain priests were arrested, but
continues thus:-
"The clergy in France being generally
Orleanists, or Monarchists in some form,
are enemies to the Commune, which is the
Republic pure and simple. Some are most
likely in communication with the Versailles
government.''
"Now suppose Ireland were actually at
war with England, and the Irish cities were
in the hands of a revolutionary government
(as, please God! they shall be), and suppose
that Mr. Gladstone's friends, Cardinal
Cullen and Bishop Moriarity, were known
to be keeping up traitorous correspondence
with the enemy .... Their beloved flock
would seize upon them and lock them up ...
not in order to torture or molest them in a
vile manner, but merely to shut them up
comfortably, say in Mountjoy Prison, or
keep them out of harm's way ... ". "If the
Church finds itself incompatible with the
Republic, it may be so much worse for the
Church."
The Irish Citizen's last editorial on the
Commune (3 June, 1871) was a plea to
recognise the real causes of that revolt and
to point out the fierce courage of the
insurgents as against the baseness and cruelty
of the men of Versailles.
The article began:-
"We cannot recall to mind any cause so
gallantly supported as that of the
Commune, which has been the object of
calumny so brutal and unscrupulous as
this." For Mitchel, the Commune was a
protest against the disgraceful peace with
Germany brought about by the "bourgeoisie,
the capitalists, bankers and property
holders". Monsieur Thiers was described as
"an old Orleanist and special representative
of the bankers and bourgeoisie.''
As to the Communards, Mitchel concludes:-
"They have made their fight. They have
failed, but this is no reason why we should
overwhelm and bury them under mountains
of calumny and obloquy ... ".
"Well, what wonder if the archbishop
and the other hostages have been massacred?
How many thousands of innocent women
and children have been slain by the
Versaillists ?"
Individual Irish men and women also
expressed themselves on the subject of the
Paris Revolution of 1871.
An article headed ''The social war in
France" appeared under the authorship of
the Fenian leader, John O'Mahony in
The Irish People (New York) 29 April, 187r.
O'Mahony deplored the Civil War in
France, and in the course of the article he
declared the following:-
"The great changes contemplated by the
Red Republicans must be wrought by
gradual and enlightened legislation if they
be possible at all. They must be produced
by reason not by brute force. Sweeping
reforms affecting every class, nay every
individual citizen, of a great nation can
never be forced ... upon a whole people."
"It is indeed possible that there may be
latent causes of a grave nature which may
to some extent justify or at least palliate the
apparent excesses of the Parisian Reds. The
republic may be in greater danger than
meets the general view.''
Also in The Irish People an article on the
Commune appeared (20 May, 1871) by
Denis Holland. Holland was a clever
Northern nationalist writer, and founded
The Irishman of Dublin. For him the
Commune was "a horrible, bloody blunder
and the sooner it is trampled under foot the
better. . . . The sooner Europe is
revolutionized the better ... but not at the
loss of so many brothers of the working-class
whom we love so well."
A former professor of the Irish College
in Paris, then parish priest of Cong, The
Very Reverend Patrick Lavelle, preached a
sermon at Barefield, Co. Clare, in July,
l871. In the course of this sermon he made
the following reference to recent events in
Paris:-
" About the Paris Commune, I have
merely to say that it was execrable, and I
am satisfied that all real friends of true
liberty feel as I do about its sacriligious
excesses, its arson, its riot and above all, its
eternally infamous murder of so many
innocent priests and laymen, headed by the
sainted Archbishop of Paris. Democracy
has nothing in common with this monster."
[From The Irishman, (Dublin) 8 July, 1871 ].
Charles ffrench Blake-Forster was a talented
young Galway novelist and historian.
His novel dealing with Co. Galway in the
Jacobite era is of surviving interest. He held
the position of High Sheriff of Galway for
a year, and was expelled from the local
County Club because of his nationalist
sympathies. An early death in 1873 cut short
what would have proved to be a notable
literary career.
A letter from Blake-Forster appeared in
the Galway Vindicator of 24 May, l871 on
the subject of the demolition of the
Vendome Column by the Commune. The
writer had visited Paris and was in angry
dismay at this act of the insurgents:"
Every honest-minded Frenchman, whether
Legitimist, Orleanist, Imperialist or
Republican-the Communards are out of
the question-every true son and soldier of
bleeding and unfortunate France should
blush with indignation at the debased
conduct and ... vandalism of the canaille of
Paris . . . ". He concludes by demanding
whether the "brave soldiers" of Macmahon
could be expected to refrain from avenging
the insult offered to the arms of France
whenever Paris would be re-captured for
the National Assembly.
The demolition of the Vendome Column,
the symbol of Bonapartist militarism, was a
Commune action which greatly impressed
the world. The monument was of gigantic
proportions, dominating its environment as
Nelson Pillar dominated the Dublin skyline.
The demolition of the Vendome
Column was supervised by the eminent
painter, Gustave Courbet, one of whose
paintings hangs in the Dublin Municipal
Art Gallery.
The fall of the Vendome column inspired
Jane Francesca Elgee Wilde ("Speranza"),
to write a poem which was published in
The Irishman. This authoress, who was the
mother of Oscar Wilde, also published a
poem (again in The Irishman) on the tragedy
of civil war in France.
The poem began:-
"Cleaving the air is a trumpet blast,
Over the land is a cry of pain,
Brothers are warring while blood flows fast,
And the Dead lie strewn as the Autumn
grain."
She tried to discover the cause of the
bitter struggle in verses introduced by these
two fine lines:-
"Have we read them aright-these sons of
toil,
These fierce, stern men of the Red
Commune."
And continuing
"Shall we dare judge, we standing apart
From the breath and the death of the flashing
guns,
Dare to misjudge the wild throbbing heart
Of Paris giving the life of her sons."
The poem spoke of the Second Empire
in lines like these:
"For power and wealth were the only goals
Of the royal races that ruled the lands;
If their palaces glared in the great world's
sight
The toilers might starve in their loathsome
dens."
The last desperate stand of the
Communards took place in the cemetery
of Pere Lachaise in Paris. In that same
cemetery is the tomb of Oscar Wilde.
Three leaders of the Commune had
connections with Ireland. Cardinal Cullen's
reference to the Commune's General
Cluseret in Ireland is interesting. According
to many authorities, including a reputable
French biographical dictionary, Cluseret
took part in the Fenian insurrection in
Ireland.
However, as far as can be established,
Gustave Paul Cluseret was never in Ireland,
though he was in contact with Fenian
leaders in America, who offered him the
position of Commander-in-Chief of an
Irish insurrectionary army.
Cluseret distinguished himself in the
suppression of the Paris insurrection of June,
1848. Afterwards he fell under a cloud in
the French army, and left France to fight in
Italy, and afterwards in the Union forces in
the American Civil War.
It was after the Civil War, in New York,
that he came in contact with the Fenians.
He has left a rather self-adulatory account
of his connection with the Fenian movement.
When he heard of an impending
Irish insurrection, he joined the rebels
because (he says) he "loved the smell of
gun-powder." However, he continues:"
In the Irish cause, it was not Ireland alone
that I saw, but humanity itself. I do not
think of my fellow creatures as so many
Austrians, Germans, Poles, Russians ....
They are all men, who ... have all alike the
duties and rights of a common humanity,
and whoever infringes upon the rights of
one man infringes upon the rights of all."
Cluseret in his account, is not at all kind
to his Fenian associates. Too much drinking,
combined with vain boasting, traitors in the
ranks, and gross incapacity all round, he
condemns as the defects which rendered the
Fenians' attempt unsuccessful. "Raise me
ten thousand men armed and I will undertake
to command them" -This was the
challenge of Cluseret to the American
Fenian leaders.
He had little time for the Head Centre of
the Fenians, James Stephens, whom he
described as a "vain-glorious man who
loved to be talked about." Cluseret sided
with Colonel Kelly, and the more bellicose
section of the movement.
He arrived in England in 1867 still in the
hope of leading the impending Irish
rebellion. By now, his demand had been
reduced to fifty thousand men in order that
an Irish revolt might be a viable proposition.
However, nothing came of all the promises,
and General Cluseret was never to draw a
sword or fire a shot for the cause of Ireland.
At the close of his account of his relations
with Fenianism, Cluseret expresses the
opinion that the use of force will never
achieve freedom and prosperity for the
people of Ireland. He also discounts the idea
of aid from abroad whether it be from
France or from the United States. Irishmen,
to achieve their full civil rights must ally
themselves with English radicals in the
struggle for the socialisation of the British
Isles (he writes). He writes as follows:-
"Ireland will never enfranchise herself by
means of violent insurrection .... It is the
English revolution which will enfranchise
Ireland. England will never begin a
revolution by herself, and Ireland by herself
will never bring one to a successful result;
but united they could both begin one and
carry it through to the end."
As may be gathered from the above
extract, Cluseret at the time of the Franco-Prussian
War had embraced the cause of
International Socialism. He rose to the high
rank of Delegate for War under the
Commune, and his task was the formation
of a defensive policy. However, his reign
was short, and he was impeached by the
Commune which had installed him. With
the assistance of a priest, he managed to
escape from Paris. This event is ironic in
view of his extreme hostility to Irish
Catholicism displayed in his article on the
Fenians.
Cluseret returned to France when the
Commune prisoners were pardoned. He
sat for a time in both Chambers, and though
initially a Socialist, he was identified with
the Right during the Dreyfus case. He died
on 23 August, 1908.
Paschal Grousset, Delegate for Foreign
Relations in the Commune, visited Ireland
on more than one occasion and has left a
book describing his visit to Ireland during
the Land War, 1886-1887. Grousset was
born in Corsica in 1845. After the fall of the
Commune he was deported to New
Caledonia. He escaped from the penal
colony with Rochefort in 1874, and afterwards
became a deputy in the French
National Assembly. The account of his Irish
visit was entitled, Les Anglais en Irlande;
notes et impressions. It was written under the
pseudonym., Philippe Daryl, and was
published in Paris in 1888. William Ewart
Gladstone described Grousset's work on
Ireland as the best study of Irish conditions
to be published during the previous fifty
years.
In the book, Grousset gives a detailed
description of life in Dublin, where he
contrasts the grace and beauty of the
buildings and statues of the main streets
with the squalor of life in the slums. He
also gives a geographical description of the
rest of the country, and an extended account
of the struggle for the land. While he is not
too favourably disposed towards the
Catholic Church in Ireland, he admits that
the parish clergy of rural Ireland are deeply
involved in the struggle for possession of
the land by the people.
Gustave Flourens, the scientist who gave
his life in defence of the Commune, pleaded
in the Left-wing Paris journal, The
Marseillaise, for the imprisoned Irish Fenian
leader, Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa. A
translation of Flourens's letter appeared in
The Irishman of 29 April, l871. Flourens
wrote:-
"Here in England, the cabinet of
Gladstone tortures in a dungeon the Irish
deputy, O'Donovan Rossa .... A few steps
from the splendid palace whence England
is governed, tragedies are enacted the like of
which were unknown even to the
Neapolitan prisons of the Bourbons-the
very prisons that inspired the tender-hearted
Gladstone with so much horror. ...
I am not personally acquainted with Rossa - but
I love him for the simplicity, the calm,
the firmness with which he narrates his
horrible torments."
The question as to whether or not there
were any Irish combatants in the ranks of
the Paris Communards remains unanswered.
Hostile writers frequently emphasise the
large number of foreigners prominent in
the insurrection. It is true that the Poles,
Dombrowski and Wrobleski, and the
German, Frankel, were prominent Communards.
Also, the very essence of International
Socialism was that the Revolution
recognised no racial frontiers.
Elihu Washburne, the American Minister
to France, who remained in Paris during
both sieges, mentions Irishmen as being
among the foreigners who rallied to the
Red flag in Paris. Sir John Furley in his
memoirs mentions that ex-members of
Captain Kirwan's Irish company in the
Franco-Prussian War were pressed into the
Commune ranks. The Irishman of 17 June,
1871, page 803, carries a peculiar report
from a "Paris correspondent" of an
English paper, under the heading, The Irish
Prisoners at Versailles. This item reads as
follows:-
"On the road near Sevres was another
escort in charge of a female party, one of
whom wore the National Guard uniform,
and vociferated louder than the rest in a
kind of broken Billingsgate in the French
tongue, garnished with a Hibernian brogue.
The virago proved to be from Erin's Isle.
The fair Fenian had enlisted in the
Commune ranks, and hurled violent
imprecations at her captors; her name was
Ellen Carroll. Some few of her countrymen
were also penned up in the human herd in
Satory, but not more than half a dozen. I
should think the story about thousands of
Irish having been captured is a myth."
George Francis Train (1829-1904), an
American magnate and controversialist,
delivered a lecture in the Theatre Royal,
Cork in July, 1871 on the subject of his part
in the Commune insurrection in France.
Though the activities of Train were
considerable in the American shipping
industry and British street railway world,
he is much better known for his enthusiastic
support for the cause of the oppressed. His
methods of support for these causes were
spectacular and sensational.
He embraced the Fenian cause for a time
and this led to a brief period of imprisonment
on landing in Ireland. During the
l870-71 period he was in France and
became involved with the Communards,
probably in Lyons. This led to his banishment
from France. Beforehand, in 1869, he
had announced himself a candidate for the
American presidency and he campaigned
on his own behalf for the following three
years, varying his campaign with an
eighty-day trip round the world. Later on
he defended Victoria Woodhull, a noted
feminist of her time.
The Irishman's report of Train' s Cork
lecture is written in a humorous style,
beginning thus:-
"On Friday week George Francis Train,
Esq., next President of America, Man of
Destiny, etc., emerged from his retirement
at Blarney to discourse the history of his
dictatorship in the South of France before
his numerous admirers in this city .... "
Although his lecture purported to deal
with his "escape from death in a French
Bastille", Train digressed considerably,
reminding his hearers frequently that "the
Train was going right through" -to the
White House! Also, his Fenian experiences
were dealt with and he made this observation
on the Irish political scene of his day:-
"Mind you, I'm not the sort of man who
comes into this country to pitch into a
castle or a barrack, shoot a constable, or
make off with a few arms. I don't believe
in that species of business. I think the men
who do this are employed by the enemies of
the country to raise the devil here in
Ireland."
"So long as the Irish people will insist on
being Catholic or Protestant, Whig or
Tory, Liberal or Conservative-so long as
Fenianism and Orangeism divide them
from each other, so long they never can be
Irishmen, so long there will be discontent
... ".
John Mitchel, writing in The Irish
Citizen of 6 May, 1871, on the subject of
priests interned in Paris by Commune,
mentioned that:-
"Amongst the clergymen arrested and
locked into the Conciergerie, we were very
sorry to find that a special friend was
included, a highly accomplished Irish
priest, the Pere Hogan, from Limerick,
known to us as President of the great
Seminary of St. Sulpice. It would be
surprising to learn that the excellent Father
Hogan had so far departed from his sacred
functions as to make himself a political
agent of the people now wrecking Paris;
and in fact it is clear that he did not act so at
all; for the same despatch which brings news
of his arrest affirms also that the Commune
was about to release him."
An obituary notice of the Very Reverend
John B. Hogan appears in The Irish Monthly
of December, 1901. The writer says that
Father Hogan was born in Coolreagh,
Co. Clare, in 1829 but at an early age was
placed in the care of relatives in the south of
France. He attended a seminary in Bordeaux
which was under the care of the Sulpician
Fathers, and entered that order. He became
professor of dogmatic theology, and afterwards
professor of moral theology, at the
seminary of Saint Sulpice in Paris. Later in
life, in 1884, he was placed as superior over
Saint John's Seminary, Brighton, near
Boston, U.S.A. and was for a time rector
of the divinity school of the Catholic
University of Washington. He died in
1901. Among his Irish friends were
numbered John Mitchel and Sir John
Gilbert.
The Irish Monthly writer quotes the
following account of Father Hogan's
experiences during the Commune from
The Freeman's Journal:-
"For upwards of thirty years, Dr. Hogan
taught theology to the clergy of France, as
well as to the rare students who came to
St. Sulpice from England, Ireland, Scotland,
the United States and various countries in
the East. He was a most interesting professor,
a man of very varied knowledge and
wide culture. He possessed the gift of
interesting his students in their work . . .
there was scarcely a priest in France who
had so many personal friends among the
bishops and clergy. This attachment was
greatly strengthened during the Prussian
siege and the Commune, when Dr. Hogan
stuck with great courage to his post. He was
three times arrested during the Commune,
and conveyed with several of his colleagues
to the Mazas Prison. Twice he was released
by the interference of Lord Cowley, then
British Ambassador in Paris. The third time
he was taken by the Communards as an
inconvenient personage, and sent out of
Paris. On his return two days afterwards
Archbishop Darboy and thirty or forty of
his priests were shot. But what grieved
Dr. Hogan most was the murder by the
insurgents of one of his students, Paul
Seigneret, an inoffensive youth, whose only
crime was that he wore the soutane.
"Dr. Hogan frequently visited Mgr.
Darboy and the other hostages in prison,
and several times faced the enemy in their
own strongholds. He wore his clerical dress
all through, and when threatened that he
would be shot if he did not leave Paris he
calmly replied that they could take his life
if they were mean enough to do so, but
that a man's life can be taken only once. He
succeeded in saving a good deal of the
valuable property of the College, having
on one occasion thousands of pounds
worth of bonds and notes in his pocket
whilst he accompanied Coeurderoy, the
Communist chief, who made a search for
documents and money all through the
College.''
What was the effect of the Commune on
Irish revolutionary movements? To many
Irishmen it meant very little, some abhorred
its very name, and a minority remembered
it well. In the William O'Brien collection
in the National Library of Ireland, there is
a handbill of 1912 headed Commune of
Paris and addressed To all Belfast Socialists.
It calls on them to meet and pay tribute to
the unforgotten dead of the Paris working
class who perished at the hands of the
Versaillists, forty-one years ago.
In a reference to local conditions the
handbill declares:-
"In the midst of the blatant reactionaries
and bigotry we are surrounded by in
Belfast, and as our most fitting answer
thereto, it becomes alike our duty and our
interest to publicly join in this world-wide
festival, and in the name of the coming
Social Revolution to celebrate the
Commune of Paris."
Perhaps we might leave the last word on
the Commune to James Connolly, our
greatest socialist. In his book, Labour in
Irish History, he makes the following
observation:-
"It is an interesting study to trace the
analogy between the course of development
of the Socialist movement of Europe after
the Commune and that of the Irish
revolutionary cause after the failure of
1867. In both cases we witness the
abandonment of insurrection and the
initiation of a struggle in which the
revolting class, while aiming at revolution,
consistently refuse the arbitrament of an
armed struggle."
He goes on to discuss the involvement of
former Fenians in the semi-constitutional
Land League in Ireland in the eighties of
the last century.
Part of the facade of one of the most beautiful churches in the world, pre-Reformation Chartres
Cathedral.
