Whenever you visit the Rock of
Cashel you cannot fail to be
reminded that you are in limestone
country. Craggy outcrops of the
limestone layers protrude through the tight
skin of turf on the Rock itself. Standing
above in majestic and remote splendour are
the ancient cathedral, the Norman castle
and the round tower, all in the same grey,
lichened limestone. Only Cormac's Chapel,
nestling into the southern angle of the
cathedral, relieves the dull grey toning with
its warm sand-stone. As you look around
the plain below you notice that the fields
on all sides are walled with limestone.
For those who journey on from Cashel
to visit Holy Cross Abbey, nine miles away
on the Thurles road, there is a rewarding
experience ahead. Along the road the limestone
walls gradually give way to the bulky
hedges of Boherlahan. As you draw near
Holy Cross, you are reminded again of
limestone country. Near the village you
pick up the remnants of the stone walls of a
former estate, and these stay with you until
you arrive at the little strung-out village.
If you have an eye for stone masonry you
will admire the quality of these walls. The
real craft of stone masonry survived in the
area tip to living memory.
The old walls guide you on to the stone
bridge across the river Suir which runs
through the village. Just then you get your
first glimpse of Holy Cross Abbey near the
bank of the river. It may be an impression
of naked stone gables and a heavy tower in
the centre. But the lovely east window of
the church, sandwiched in between two
massive buttresses, will probably catch
your eye.
The view from across the river is the
classic view of Holy Cross, and the one
The view across the River Suir shows the East window, and windows of transept south and
north, and at right, part of the present church.
which should be seen first. In his Irish
Churches and Monastic Buildings, Volume III,
A. G. Leask is enthused to say:
"Few ancient Irish buildings make a more
attractive architectural composition than
those at Holy Cross beside the Suir, as
viewed from the eastern bank of that
river. The church is neither very large nor
lofty but its low, broad tower, its gables,
its massive salient buttresses and its
varied window tracery make an effective
whole."
The river is still and smooth-surfaced
here, banked up behind the old mill-weir,
and faithfully reflects the outlines of the
abbey.
The abbey, however, cannot be seen to
best advantage for the present. An intricate
maze of blue and yellow scaffolding covers
the east end of the church and the entire
tower. Restoration work started on the
abbey church in March, 1970, and will
continue for the next three years. It is being
fully restored to bring it into use as a parish
church. This restoration has brought Holy
Cross into the news, and more people are
visiting it now than ever before, perhaps in
its long history. The camera-minded tourist
who is seeking picturesque views will be
disappointed, because of the scaffolding,
but the personal feeling everyone who visits
does get of an ancient church gradually
coming to life again is a compensating and
unique experience.
The abbey is in a good state of preservation,
and there is a sufficient amount of the
main buildings surviving to discern easily
the typical Cistercian ground plan. The
church, as is expected is on the north of the
cloister and follows the usual pattern for
Cistercian churches: a nave with aisles,
north and south transept with two chapels
in each transept, and an unaisled presbytery
or chancel. It is the best preserved of all the
buildings. The walls of the west wing of
the abbey, referred to as the lay-brothers'
range, are also fairly intact, apart from their
parapet tops. But of the east wing, which
contained the choir monks' dormitory,
only the ground floor remains, and the
south wing, where the refectory and kitchen
were, has almost entirely disappeared. Apart
from this central block of buildings there is
the abbots' house which is also substantially
intact. This was a quaint twin-gabled house
with early Tudor windows, window seats
and spacious fireplaces. Nearer to the river
is a badly wrecked building of rather
complicated plan, which probably served
as the abbey guest house.
The good state of preservation of the
abbey church was one of the major
considerations which led to the decision to
restore it for liturgical use again. All its
walls (with the exception of the south
transept gable), its stone window tracery
and the great tower are practically intact.
Part of the first church built by the
original Cistercian community here still
survives and forms most of the nave as it is
today. It would be important if this
structure could be precisely dated. The year
n8o is generally taken as the year the abbey
was founded for the Cistercians by King
Donal Mór O Brien, a devoted builder of
cathedrals and abbeys. But that is as far as
contemporary documentation goes. The
most one can say is that this first Cistercian
church belongs to the end of the twelfth
century or the beginning of the thirteenth.
All that is left of it today is the nave and its
arcades and the south aisle wall.
This structure is in the simple Gothic
style, and the stonework, although solid, is
coarse even for the primitive Cistercians,
whose early churches are often striking for
their pleasing proportions and restrained
design. There is no dressed or wrought
stonework to be found anywhere, even in
the pointed arches and piers of the arcades.
There is proportion here but there is also
an austerity and coarseness. This may have
resulted more from lack of funds than from
a conscious striving to express the Cistercian
constitution which laid down that abbey
churches were to be simple and plain with a
whitewashed interior.
Although the founder, King Donal Mór
O Brien, amply endowed the abbey with
lands, it was in recurring financial straits for
the first century of its existence. Stone-craft
was an old craft in the country by the time
Holy Cross came to be built, but the
community was probably not financially
positioned to engage skilled men. From
studying the size and irregular shape of the
stone used and the masonry of the walls,
one gets the impression that there is little
evidence of skill in the quarrying and
dressing of the stone. And there is no lack
of good stone in the area all round, for the
limestone is scarcely a foot below the
surface here.
The Gothic style was introduced into
Ireland by the Cistercian Order. It was only
gradually, however, that the novelty of the
new architecture supplemented the old
native style. In the first Cistercian abbeys to
be built, such as Mellifont and Boyle, the
native Romanesque style was still dominant.
There are even some English and
Burgundian influences showing through
the native style in some of these abbeys. In
Monasternenagh or Maigue, a Cistercian
abbey founded near Croom by Turlogh
O Brien in about 1148 there are some
features in the oldest part of the church
reminiscent of Burgundian Romanesque.
This is carefully noted by Francoise Henry
in her recent addition to her series on Irish
Art, Irish Art in the Romanesque Period
1120-1170, p. 188.
Although Monasternenagh was the
mother house of Holy Cross, there appears
to be no indication of architectural
influences from there. A simple Gothic
style had established itself by the time the
first abbey church was built at Holy Cross
"in honour of St. Benedict, Our Lady and
the True Cross". What is left of this simple
church demonstrates that the first Cistercian
community here was poor and fervent.
This impression is strengthened by the
request made to Abbot Stephen Lexington
when he visited the abbey in 1227 during
the height of the Mellifont conspiracy.
Abbot Stephen recorded this unusual
request with fidelity and detail. Two monks
of Holy Cross requested that they be
allowed to detach themselves from the
Community to lead a more austere life as
hermits.
Beyond a few scattered and revealing
references of this kind, little is known so
far of the monks of Holy Cross in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. The
local countryside still retains something of
the character which these early Cistercians
stamped on it-old weirs and mill races
along the river, a fragmentary tithe barn
which now stands solitary beside a pathway
long since overgrown, townland names
such as Grange and Clohane, small boreens
now leading nowhere in particular, the
grass covered foundations of small villages
or clusters of houses where local families
lived who were retainers of the abbey in
its early days.
It is mainly as a noted place of pilgrimage
that Holy Cross made its impression in
recorded history. When it established itself
as such one can only vaguely guess, but
there is no doubt that it was the possession
of a special relic of the True Cross which
made it unique among Irish Cistercian
houses, and eventually raised it from the
level of a poor, insignificant monastery
to-one of Ireland's most frequented religious
centres. That this was no ordinary relic is
clear from the amount of legend that has
centred around it and from the place it held
in the veneration and devotion of the people
particularly in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries.
One of the legends, now rather tangled,
which has persisted as a kind of folk
memory with remarkable tenacity down to
the present day relates that the relic came to
Holy Cross through a queen of England.
This legend, colourfully called the Legend
View of the Abbey from the north-west showing the west window and doorway.
The cloisters and south side of the Abbey.
of the Good Woman's Son, was first
recorded by Brother Malachy Hartry, who
was one of the small band of monks
attached to the abbey in the Confederation
of Kilkenny period. He was the first
chronicler of Holy Cross, and in 1640 he
wrote the Triumphalia Chronologica
Monasterii Sanctae Crucis in Hibernia. This
frayed and smoke-blackened Latin manuscript
is now preserved in Saint Patrick's
College, Thurles.
Brother Malachy claimed he found the
legend in an old Irish manuscript then in
the abbey, but no doubt it was also part of
the local lore of his time. The legend is
briefly as follows: An English prince, said
to have been the son of Henry II and Queen
Eleanor, was given the commission of
collecting the Peter's Pence throughout
Ireland.
While journeying near Holy Cross he
was slain by a member of the O Fogartys,
the family who were chiefs of the area. The
prince was un-ceremoniously buried at the
place of the crime, but his body was
miraculously located two years later by
monks from the abbey. When they
discovered his identity they conveyed the
body to their church where they buried it
with great honour. A spring burst up at the
spot where he had been originally buried.
(A spring-well in the townland of Boola,
two miles from the abbey, is according to
local tradition the spring of the legend, and
still goes by the name, Good Woman's
Well).
When news of her son's death and burial
in the abbey church was brought to the
queen, she prevailed upon the king to confer
upon the abbey "a considerable piece of the
Holy Cross" which he had as one of his
highly esteemed possessions. ( Triumphalia
Chronologica Sanctae Crucis in Hibernia,
Edited by Rev. Denis Murphy, 1891, p. 42).
Thus according to legend the relic of the
True Cross came to the abbey.
The elaborate and richly carved sedilia in
the chancel of the church, although
belonging to the early fifteenth century,
was known in Brother Malachy's time as
the Tomb of the Good Woman's Son. This
is still the popular name it goes by, and
probably will always be. There can be no
question but that it was designed primarily
to serve as a sedilia. It may also well have
been constructed deliberately over this exact
spot to mark the site of an important tomb
and serve as a monument for it.
But there is very little, if anything, in
documentary records to support this legend,
even in its broad outline. Recent historians,
including Edmund Curtis, have opted for
O'Halloran's version, that the relic of the
True Cross came directly from the Pope to
the O Briens of Thomond. The eighteenth-century
historian, O'Halloran, recorded
that Pope Paschal II gave a relic of the True
Cross in 1110 to Muircheartach O Brien,
presumably in recognition of his work for
the reform of the Church, and that he set
about building a church at the site of the
abbey of Holy Cross to enshrine this relic.
Muircheartach, who was the King of
Munster and who died in 1119, was the
grand-uncle of Donal Mór O Brien, who
founded Holy Cross for the Cistercians.
This version although unsupported by
direct documentary evidence appears to fit
in better with the fragmentary data
available, one of which is that the mother
of Muircheartach was Gormlaith, daughter
of the O Fogarty, who is recorded in the
Annals of the Four Masters as distributing
"much wealth among cells and churches
and the poor of the Lord, for the welfare
of her soul".
The O Fogartys, much maligned by the
legends surrounding the abbey, may finally
emerge rather as its benefactors and heroes,
and the presence of the O Fogarty tomb in
the north wall of the chancel, the site often
reserved for the founder's body, would
substantiate this.
Wherever the real truth lies, there seems
to be little doubt that a unique relic of the
True Cross was attached to the site at the
time Donal Mór drew up his endowment
charter and granted the surrounding lands
"in honour of the Almighty God and of
Holy Mary, the Virgin, and St. Benedict
and the Holy Cross, for the welfare of my
soul and the souls of my parents ... to
the monks of the Holy Cross ... ".
From then on the abbey appears to have
been officially known and listed as the abbey
of the Holy Cross-Monasterium Sanctae
Crucis in Hibernia.
The Black Death which swept through
Ireland in 1348-49 may have given a big
impetus to pilgrimages to Holy Cross in
honour of its relic. After the worst of the
dread plague was over, it is likely that the
people turned all the more towards
pilgrimages and other devotional practices
to invoke divine protection. There are no
known records of how the Holy Cross
community fared in that time of general
calamity, but the fact that the monks leased
some monastic lands in 1352 could indicate
that their numbers were depleted. With its
tradition of providing hospitality for all,
the pilgrim and wayfarer alike, it would
have been a sure target for contagion.
Many serious consequences for medieval
Ireland followed in the train of the Black
Death, not least the decline of the religious
houses themselves and a general decline in
morals everywhere. But pilgrimages and
other devotional practices seem to have
gone on unabated. Holy Cross began to
emerge as one of the country's chief places
of pilgrimage, a kind of Irish Canterbury.
The first known direct reference to the
Holy Cross pilgrimages comes from the
year 1489-90, but it relates to a practice
already long established. A papal mandate
of that year states that pilgrims to the abbey
were accustomed to make offering at "the
wood of the Holy Cross in the Church"
(Calendar of Papal Registers, Vol. XIV,
p. 256).
The importance given the abbey because
of the pilgrimages probably played a big
part in the decision to reconstruct the church
and the monastery buildings at the
beginning of the fifteenth century.
It is to be remarked also that the
enthusiastic patronage of the White Earl,
James Butler IV, Earl of Ormond, was
extended to the abbey at this period and this
may have some bearing on the dating of
the re-building. The White Earl was
lieutenant and deputy for the king for
several periods during his long term as
earl (1405-1452). He was also a man of
acknowledged refinement and education.
Hence the abbey had the important
patronage of one of the most influential and
cultured men in the country at the time of
its reconstruction.
A few references in contemporary documents,
and some clues in the actual fabric
of the building itself help to date the
principal work of reconstruction to roughly
between the years 1400 and 1450. This was
an outstanding period of building activity
in the country generally. Many new
friaries were being built for the Franciscans
and the Dominicans in the bigger centres of
population, which brought a new and
graceful development to Irish Gothic
architecture.
Many of the established monasteries and
churches were given new features at this
time, such as large windows and bell
towers, but Holy Cross was one of the few
Cistercian houses where an almost complete
rebuilding was undertaken.
In the opinion of H. G. Leask, the
Cistercians, the most noted of the monastic
builders, attained at Holy Cross one of the
highest achievements of the fifteenth
century. He describes rebuilding as "one of
the most highly developed and elaborate
architectural works" erected after 1400. It is
indeed noteworthy that this achievement
was undertaken and carried through at a
time of growing decadence and decline
within the Cistercian Order, and at a time,
too, when the Order was moving farther
View from the chancel, showing rib vaulting in ceiling and the excavated rock foundations.
Beyond the chancel are the monks' choir, the nave and the west window and door.
away from the spirit and fervour of the
founders.
The whole eastern end of the church was
rebuilt, namely the chancel, the transept,
the monks' choir and the tower. The
cloister arcade was rebuilt also as was the
abbots' house, while the west and east
ranges and the guesthouse were considerably
reconstructed. The old nave of the church
was apparently untouched apart from the
additions of the large west window and
two early Tudor windows in the west
gable, and two carved doorways.
Local limestone was apparently used
for the reconstruction. This local stone is of
high quality. Recently a group water
scheme undertook the laying of water
mains at a depth of about three feet along
the approach roads to Holy Cross. In places
the limestone was only a foot or even less
from the surface, and it proved to be solid
and stubborn. The mechanical digger used
for digging the trenches could make no
impression on it, and a blasting expert had
to be called in. Even after blasting with
small charges of gelignite, the rock was
still unyielding and could not be dug out
without the use of a compressor. In planning
the course of the water-mains soundings
were made with a crowbar along the road
margins and in fields to test the depth of
soil and the closeness of the rock to the
surface. Whenever unflawed rock was
struck by the crowbar, it rang with a bell-like
sound, a full and resonant sound. As I
write this in the site hut in the abbey
cloisters, I can hear the same sound coming
from. the top of the church tower. The
masons are rebuilding the tower top after
inserting copper flashing under the stone
guttering of the wall walk, and the small
ringing sounds of chisel and mallet on the
limestone echoes around the cloister. This
is the stone craftsmen have worked with
for well nigh a thousand years.
Much of the stone for the first building
of the abbey and also for its reconstruction
in the first half of the fifteenth century
probably came from the actual site of the
abbey or from quarries near at hand. In the
summer of 1970 the abbey church was
archaeologically excavated interiorly and
exteriorly, and the naked quarryhead of
that entire area was exposed again. This
craggy quarryhead, in all its harshness, was
exposed to the light of day once more much
as it was when the fifteenth-century
quarrymen were working it. One could
plainly see then where these quarrymen
followed out the good seams of rock, which
when handled with skill would have come
up in suitable bulk for shaping, trimming,
dressing and even carving by the stone-dressers.
The mason-craft of the fifteenth-century
Holy Cross is outstanding. The masonry is
superior, and the wrought and carved work
is in flawless blue-grey limestone, some of
which was polished, and which is still
popularly called "black marble". The joints
in this work are little thicker than a line.
Much of the work in the reconstructed
church is in a remarkable state of preservation
and freshness.
The well-preserved stone roof of the
chancel, the crossing, and the north transept
with its pleasing ribbed vaulting repeated
in a minor key, as it were, in the roofs of
the chapels, the sedilia and the so-called
shrine, gives a movement and unity to this
portion of the church. The ribs of the
vaulting are close-set and some of them are
moulded or fluted, and all fade into needle
points in the walls.
There is a great variety of design in the
tracery of the windows, all of which are
intact (there was some good minor
restoration done on them by the Office of
Public Works early in this century). The
six light east window has reticulated or
fish-net tracery. It has a simplicity of style
combined with fine proportion and balance,
and even in its unglazed state gives life to
the chancel.
On the south wall of the chancel is the
church's piece de resistance, the sedilia, which
The beauty of the East window from the inside. The doorway of the chapter house.
Aerial view of the Abbey from the north-west showing the general plan and the
River Suir and bridge.
as already mentioned goes by the mysterious
and colourful name of the Tomb of The
Good Woman's Son. It is the most richly
carved work of its kind in the country as
well as being the most elaborate. Here one
feels is Irish mason-craft at its best.
The base of the sedilia with its panels in
vine-leaf motif is carved with a freedom
and an assurance which indicate that the
craftsman had a mastery of his technique
and his material. From the base slender
pillars flow up into the points of the ogee
arches and are carried on into vine-leaf
crockets and thin pinnacles. Here, and on
the richly carved canopy which crowns the
sedilia, the work is detailed and fine,
"worthy of the cabinetmakers' craft", to
use Leask' swords. One is held in admiration
not only of the excellence of the work, but
also of the mastery of the craftsman who
had the durability and potentiality of the
hard limestone measured with such accurate
judgement.
The sides of the base of the so-called
shrine between the two side chapels of the
south transept display similar ornate workmanship.
Here some of the crocketed
pinnacles have miniature human heads,
birds and dogs, and in one place a fanciful
reptile worked with a detail and precision
which are worthy of early Irish manuscript
illumination. The purpose of this structure
still remains a puzzle. At fast sight it would
appear to have been designed as a tomb,
with the arcades over it forming its monument.
Another theory is that it was here the
relic of the True Cross was enshrined. A
third explanation, which is the one local
tradition favours, is that here the bodies of
the monks were "waked" before burial.
Although this explanation does not fit in
with traditional Cistercian burial ceremonial,
the local name for the structure
"The Waking Place of the Monks", will
doubtless remain, like the name "The Tomb
of the Good Woman's Son".
Here and there in the interior of the
church are isolated, random carvings-at
the whim of the masons one would almost
think. Some of these are life-like and
strikingly natural, some are gentle
caricatures. An owl with outstretched
wings seems about to fly out of one of the
great piers of the crossing, and in the archway
of a side chapel is carved the face of a
monk smiling benignly. These and the
others which abound give relief to the more
elaborate stylised work, such as the sedilia,
and also stamp the work as being that of
native craftsmen.
Holy Cross is unmistakably in the
vernacular or native Gothic style which
foully established itself in the country in
the fifteenth century. The important
patronage of the Anglo-Norman earl of
Ormond, James Butler, does not appear to
have brought any English influence to bear
on the style of the work. This is entirely
fitting, as Holy Cross from its humble
beginnings was for the most part Gaelic in
its loyalties and personnel. All the earl of
Ormond requested apparently was that a
wax candle be kept burning before the high
altar on his behalf on certain feastdays, "in
honour and praise of God and his
Immaculate Mother, the Virgin Mary".
(Irish Monastic and Episcopal Deeds, No. 26
[A 16]).
The rebuilding of Holy Cross undoubtedly
gave a new importance and
attraction to the place, and this in turn gave
an added impetus to pilgrimages in honour
of the Holy Rood. Another custom which
reflects the veneration in which the Holy
Cross relic was held was the taking of
solemn oaths on it. One of the first recorded
instances of this comes from 1517 when
Sir Piers Butler, who later was created earl
of Ormond, made an agreement with his
cousin, Edmund Butler of Cahir, which
they ratified at Clonmel by an oath on
the Baculum Jesu and the wood of the True
Cross at Holy Cross and other sacred relics.
This treaty settled an old feud between the
two families.
The abbot and community of Holy
right: Shrine in south transept with rough base
and highly ornamented front and arch pillars.
The sedilia, the most ornate work in the abbey.
Cross Abbey managed to evade the first
suppression of the monasteries under
Henry VIII. But the initial zeal of the king's
reforming clique in Dublin was directed
against images and relics, especially those
which were held in special veneration.
Archbishop George Brown of Dublin, the
first bishop appointed in Ireland by King
Henry after his break with Rome, wrote to
Thomas Cromwell, Chancellor of England,
on 20 June, 1538:
"There goith a common bruite among
Irishmen that I entende to ploke down
Our Lady of Tryme, with other places of
pilgrimage as the Holy Crosse and souch
like, which indeade I never attempted
although my conscience wolde right well
serve me to oppresse souch idolls".
The highly revered statue of Our Lady of
Trim was destroyed in 1539 and the same
fate befell the Baculum Jesu, the supposed
staff of Christ which tradition alleges had
been Saint Patrick's crozier, and which was
preserved in Saint Patrick's Cathedral.
Holy Cross, however, escaped both
confiscation and the destruction of its
enshrined relic.
Later, however, in 1563, Elizabeth I
granted the abbey and lands to her cousin,
Themas Butler, earl of Ormond. The earl,
however, allowed the few remaining monks
to stay on as his tenants in part of the abbey
(probably the west range), and leased the
rest to outsiders. Here the monks continued
to reside and to act as custodians of the
treasured relic. Pilgrimages continued unabated
and apparently unrestricted, because
of the location of the abbey in the heart of
Ormond territory.
During the Elizabethan period the abbey
played another role. Soon after Elizabeth's
accession to the throne it became a rallying
ground for resistance to English rule. In
1560 the O'Moore clan of Leix gathered at
Holy Cross, and bound themselves together
in an unbreakable alliance before the holy
relic to redress the wrongs inflicted on their
royal race. Under Queen Mary their lands
had been thrown open to English planters,
and they themselves reduced to the status of
small land-holders. Shane O'Neill of Ulster,
the queen's main opponent in Ireland,
regarded this meeting important enough to
send his rhymer as emissary. In 1579, James
Fitzmaurice, the leader of the Desmond
Rebellion, is believed to have visited Holy
Cross. He, more than any other leader of
the period, moulded the growing unrest
and rebellion into a religious crusade for the
freedom and restoration of Catholicism.
Towards the end of the century, Hugh
O'Neill and Red Hugh O'Donnell emerged
as the acknowledged leaders and champions
of the Irish cause. O'Neill's ambition was to
rally the support of the southern chieftains,
and contemporary references in the state
papers show clearly that he was well aware
of the potential of the relic of Holy Cross
in cementing the allegiance of these
chieftains and sought opportunities of
visiting the abbey. On 2 January, 1590, Sir
John Dowdall, a captain of the English
forces, reported that he attributed the
rebellion of O'Neill to a popish plot which
had been hatched at "Lyfford, Holy Cross
and such-like superstitious places, by sundry
seminary priests as McCrast, Father Archer
and the like sent by the Pope and the King
of Spain".
The Annals of the Four Masters report that
O'Neill actually arrived at the gate of the
monastery shortly before the battle of
Kinsale and that the monks brought out
the "croch Naomh, (the Holy Rood) to
shelter and protect him".
After the Battle of Kinsale, the occupation
of Holy Cross proved too hazardous for the
monks. Later in the century, around 1637,
in a climate of comparative religious
toleration under Charles I, a small community
returned to the abbey with the
intention of establishing a central noviciate
there. But by that time the buildings were
already in disrepair. The monks' dormitory
was partially ruinous as early as 1626
(Triumphalia, p. 147) and by 1637 the nave
of the church was roofless.
Repair work was done on some of the
buildings to make them habitable between
1637 and the Confederation of Kilkenny.
The west range shows signs of having been
adapted at that period to the requirements
of the small community and the noviciate.
The abbot of the time even tackled the work
of re-roofing the nave of the church, but
this proved too much for him. Pilgrimages
became common again. The Cromwellian
war brought to an end whatever hopes
there were of restoring public Catholicism
and the religious orders.
While Holy Cross Abbey escaped
ravishing at the hands of the Cromwellian
forces, it had to be abandoned by the
Cistercians after 1650. The Civil Survey
drawn up at the time noted in the section
dealing with Holy Cross:
"Upon these lands stands an old abbey
church and two stone houses out of
repair, a stone bridge on the River
Sewer, and two or three grinding mills
and a tucking mill and Fower Eele
fishings . .. " . (Civil Survey, County of
Tipperary, Vol. l, p. 64.)
Holy Cross never housed a religious
community again. An abbot and one monk
are recorded as connected with it up to
1700, and from then until around 1740 a
solitary monk lived there ministering to
the people.
Doctor Charles William Wall, vice-provost
of Trinity College, who acquired
the abbey and much of the surrounding
lands in l833, did some timely and well
executed repair work on the church,
notably the building of supporting arches
across the aisles of the nave and the
strengthening of the south aisle arcade.
Apart from this, the abbey buildings have
come down to us probably more or less as
they were when the last Cistercian link with
the place was finally broken.
The earliest sketches and photographs of
the abbey show it covered with a heavy
mantle of ivy, which remained until it was
given into the care of the State as a national
monument in 1880.
Today, almost a hundred years later, the
abbey church has been taken in hand for
full restoration. The ancient, enduring and
beautiful edifice, anchored on its craggy
limestone foundation, looks as solid as ever
inside the casing of scaffolding which now
surrounds it. This must surely be one of the
most challenging and elaborate restoration
works undertaken in Ireland.
In The Stones of Le Thoronet, the French
writer and architect, Fernand Pouillon,
recaptures imaginatively the arrival of the
master builder at the site of the Cistercian
abbey which he was about to build and
which was to prove his masterpiece. It was
in the year ll6l, and he was seeing the site
for the first time:
"We approached the site of the abbey
from the east; a road in poor repair, rain-furrowed,
climbs steeply in two loops
through a thick forest of oak and pine.
To anyone arriving by this route the
abbey will be revealed suddenly. The
site of the monastery slopes gently
towards the stream; the thought at once
came to me that this situation would lend
itself to interesting arrangements of levels.
In the evening we climbed the slope
which faces north and sat down on the
first ridge".
-(The Stones of Le Thoronet, Jonathan
Cape, London, 1970, pp. 11, 12).
The restoration architect has not such
free scope for his genius. He has to meet the
restrictions and challenges of the building
he is restoring, He has to take the building
as he finds it, as it evolved during the course
of the centuries. He has to live with it,
become intimate with its architectural style
and character, study its history and building300 THE CAPUCHIN ANNUAL
above: Stone calvary scene.
on left: Rib vaulting of the shrine.
below: Room over the south transept.
periods and see its affinity with other
buildings of the same period which can give
him some guidance in his work. The most
he can aim. to do is to interpret the building
as he thinks it was from his study and
knowledge and to express this in his plans
and drawings.
In the restoration of Holy Cross Abbey
church the architect has a relatively intact
structure to work on. He is taking this
building as it has evolved out of the
centuries, including Doctor Wall's practical
additions of about a hundred and thirty
years ago, and restoring it. The principal
areas of conjecture for him are the
type of parapet tops which crowned the
tower and chancel walls, and the way in
which the south gable of the south transept,
which is entirely missing, should be
replaced. In these areas he will be guided by
his intimacy with the building and its
affinity with surviving medieval buildings
of similar design.
The restoration will be an intelligent
interpretation of Holy Cross Abbey church
as it is seen and felt by an architect of today.
The work that will be done in this decade
to restore it as a functional church will
always be recognizable to the discerning
eye. The same authentic materials, notably
Irish oak and limestone, will be used again,
but these will be finished with today's
machinery and technique. The main
requirements will be that work of this
decade will be in keeping with the building
as it stands and that it will match it in
quality and craftsmanship.
A number of reasons have led to the
decision to restore Holy Cross, not least its
good state of preservation. Another practical
reason is its ideal location in the centre of
the village and close to the plain, worn-out
parish church, of Emancipation vintage,
which it will eventually supersede.
There are some who may regret that the
Holy Cross Abbey they knew, with all its
remembered atmosphere and picturesqueness
as a roofless ruin reflected in the river,
will to some extent be transformed. Others
perhaps will feel that ancient buildings
which emerged out of, and were shaped by,
movements and periods in the past, which
served their times and had definite life
spans, should be left as time has given them
to us. There is great merit in this
philosophy.
There are strong reasons, however, for
making Holy Cross an exception. Beside
the practical reasons already mentioned, it
must also be borne in mind that the abbey
church, like so many of the medieval
churches, was forcibly deprived of the
function for which it was built. There are
strong aesthetical and religious reasons as
well. The desire to preserve this lovely and
architecturally important medieval building
is dominant. So also is the desire to have a
church which has spanned eight centuries as
a place of worship for the people of today
and tomorrow who share the same faith as
those who built it in the late twelfth
century and those who reconstructed it in
the fifteenth. 
Worthy of mention also is the intention
of Doctor Morris, the archbishop of Cashel
and Emly, to enshrine relics of the True
Cross in the restored church, so that it will
be dedicated again to the Cross of Our
Saviour, the symbol of the world's
redemption, and the essential ingredient in
the Christian way of life.
Holy Cross Abbey church thus will not
only be restored to serve its original
function, but also is likely to fulfil its
ancient role as a place of special pilgrimage
and prayer, dedicated to the True Cross.
For our times and for centuries to come
this may be an important role.
