The flora of Ireland, in everyday language, is the rich, green, peelable rind of Ireland, the edible and nutritious layer of the country, the grass roots of the economic spectrum. To the botanist the expression means the total indigenous plant cover of the island of Ireland. The foreign botanist noting a publication entitled, Flora of Ireland, An Irish Flora or Flora Hibernica, would expect a work dealing with the native plants and established aliens of the western Atlantic landfall, arranged according to an accepted classification in families, genera and species, with keys to aid in identification and with chapters on climate, topography and ecology, the work to include all plant life or flowering plants alone. The total flora of Ireland comprises many types of plant representative of every group, Algae (scums on ponds, green colouring on bark, seaweeds); Fungi (mushrooms, dry rot, plant diseases, e.g. rust of wheat); Bryophyta (mosses, as sphagnum peat moss for horticulture); Pteridophyta (ferns); 
Gymnosperma (conifers, yew) and Spermaphyta (flowering plants including grasses, dandelions and trees). The cryptogams (meaning hidden marriage) are the nonflowering plants, so called because the early botanists were puzzled as to how they increased and multiplied. The phanerogams (meaning open marriage) are the flowering plants. Weather affects plant growth and plant distribution. In Ireland the mild oceanic climate and small range of annual temperature, ensures growth throughout the year and a green appearance over the whole country in every season. Reginald Scully writing in 1916 said, "The climate of Kerry may be briefly summarised as moist, mild and changeable. Owing both to its configuration and geographical position, Kerry offers peculiar scope for pluvial conditions. It stands full in the way of the prevailing moisture-laden winds from the Atlantic, which, after sweeping across vast regions of heated ocean, here meet with their first land in the form of the most elevated ranges in Ireland. These, especially 
in their cool upper regions, form only too often an effective cause of precipitation." This pluvial description describes also the climate of Ireland differing only in that the rainfall decreases and the winds are tempered eastwards. Praeger remarked that winter on the west coast might be described as a succession of westerly gales with westerly winds between. Trees when they occur in the west incline eastwards from constant pressure, woodland is windshorn. Treeless headlands are a feature of exposed districts from west Cork to west Donegal. The constancy and frequency of the rain rather than its volume are a feature of Irish climatic conditions. Humidity and warmth encourage lush growth especially in sheltered areas. Gardens in Ireland grow a large and varied collection of ornamental trees and shrubs, evidence of the mildness of the Irish climate. Many of these could not be grown out of doors in other parts of northern and central Europe. Ireland has a flora of approximately 1,000 wild flowering plants and ferns compared with 1,500 in Britain and a greater number in France and adjacent countries. The smaller flora-list is the result of the early isolation of Ireland from the Continent. Britain became an island at a later date. The melting of the ice-sheet following the last glaciation resulted in the raising of the sealevel and the separation of Ireland from. the great land-mass of Eurasia. Ireland, apart from Iceland, is the most westerly terrain in Europe, and the flora is a westward extension of the European flora. The sea barriers formed were effective in preventing the further migration of plants and animals to the island on the western periphery of Europe. In spite of a reduced flora the vegetation of Ireland is of great interest. Due to a long history of isolation, island plant communities are of great phytogeographic interest to the botanist. Studies on the biota (plants and animals) of part of a region contribute to the biogeographic knowledge of the whole region. The islands 
of Ireland and Britain share the shallow seas that overlie the continental shelf. Floristic and other biological studies pertinent to the two islands are interdependent due to the common historical origin of the flora. Both islands, with the associated lesser islands of Blasket, Isle of Man, Aran Islands, Hebrides, Saltee, Orkney and others form an archipelago off the west coast of Europe which is referred to for scientific purposes as the British Isles. The flora composition of Ireland is made up of plants from different regions. The ground cover over the country consists of many common plants which are found universally distributed in the several continents. This flora is referred to as the Cosmopolitan element and includes such well known plants as, Phragmites australis (Common reed) Urtica dioica (Nettle, Neanntóg) Rumex acetosa (Sorrel, Samhadh bó) The reed, a grass nearly three metres high, is found growing in water in the canals and lakes of Ireland. On Lough Derg and Lough Ree extensive reed-swamps are common in quiet lagoons. Sorrel is a plant with acid leaves and may be used in salad. The flora of Ireland is described as being predominantly "atlantic" in character. Plants, the range of distribution of which is confined to western Europe, are found growing in abundance in Ireland. Plants of the Atlantic element include, 
Ilex aquifolia (Holly, Cuileann) Ulex europaeus (Furze, Aiteann) Umbilicus rupestris (Pennywort) Erica tetralix (Cross-leaved heath, Fraoch) Digitalis purpurea (Foxglove, Meiríni puca) 
The plants quoted are all well known. Foxglove spikes are found in abundance on heathy banks and in shady places late in the year. The word cuileann is a root-word in many place names. The most striking element in the flora is the Mediterranean element also referred to 
in literature as the Lusitanian or Pyreneen element but said by one botanist recently to be more correctly referred to as Hiberno-Cantabrian. In this group the plants concerned are strongly represented in south-west Europe and in the lands of the Mediterranean basin. In Ireland they reach their most northerly limit. Included here are, 
Arbutus unedo (Arbutus, Strawberry tree, Caithne) Saxifraga spathularis (St. Patrick's cabbage, Cabaiste madra rua) Otanthus maritimus (Cottonweed) Erica mackaiana (Mackay' s heath) Erica erigena (Irish or Mediterranean heath) Daboecia cantabrica (Saint Dabeoc' s heath, Fraoch na haon coise) Pinguicula grandiflora (Great butterwort, Liath uisge) Euphorbia hyberna (Irish spurge, Bainne caoin) Neotinea intacta (Irish or Mediterranean orchid) Adiantum capillus-veneris (Maiden-hair fern) 
The species mentioned are found variously in counties Kerry, Galway, Mayo and Donegal with the exception of Otanthus which has its only Irish locality on the south shore of Lady's Island Lake, Co. Wexford. Most of the plants are found on peaty ground. The butterwort occurs in such abundance in May on the mountains of Kerry that it has been described as the "glory of Kerry". Daboecia cantabrica, with its large pendant bell flowers, is conspicuous amongst furze and heathers in Connemara and Mayo, extending from Spiddal to Westport. The specific epithet of the heather, Erica erigena, was chosen as applicable to something of Irish origin, getting the name from Duns Scotus Erigenus, the ninth-century Irish philosopher. The Arctic-Alpine element, sometimes 
referred to as the Boreal-Montane element, includes those plants which occur on the high mountains of Europe or in the Northern latitudes. In Ireland they are found on cliff ledges on some western mountains, notably Brandon, Mweelrea, Slieve League, Ben Bulben and inland on the Galtees. A selection of species of this group follows, 
Thalictrum alpinum (Alpine meadow rue) Cardaminopsis petrae (Northern rockcress) Minuartia recurva (a sandwort) Arenaria ciliata (Irish sandwort) Dryas octopetala (Mountain avens, Leathin) Saxifraga oppositifolia (Purple saxifrage) Saxifraga aizoides (Yellow mountain saxifrage) Saxifraga hirculus (Yellow marsh saxifrage) Sedum rosea (Roseroot) Saussurea alpina (Alpine saussurea) Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (Bearberry) Oxyria digyna (Mountain sorrel) Salix herbacea (Least willow) Poa alpina (Alpine poa) 
Both Minuartia recurva and Arenaria ciliata are absent from Britain. Minuartia was known for the first time in 1964 as part of the flora of Ireland when it was gathered from crevices in bare Old Red Sandstone slabs at 2,000 feet on the Caha Mountains between Cork and Kerry. The nearest other locality is in north-west Spain, six hundred miles distant. It is a small tufted plant with fine needle-like leaves and groups of small white flowers, a rock-garden plant. Arenaria ciliata is confined to limestone cliffs on the Ben Bulben range. The American element in the Irish flora has few representatives, though they are widespread in North America. Some of the plants also occur in West Scotland. Included in this group are, 
Spiranthes romanzoffiana (Drooping ladies' tresses) Eriocaulon aquaticum (Pipewort) 
Arbutus unedo L. Strawberry tree, Caithne. Native in rocky places and in boggy woods in Kerry, West Cork and on some islands on Lough Gill, Sligo. An evergreen tree with white bell flowers and strawberry-like fruits. In Mediterranean lands1 Arbutu." is found as part of the maquis vegetation. Caithne is a root-word in many places as Ardnacaithne near Smerwick, N. of Dingle. 
Sisyrinchium bermudiana (Blue-eyed grass) Hypericum canadense (Canadian St. John's wort) Naias flexilis (a water plant) 
Pipewort, bearing globular heads of small blue-grey flowers, fringes many bog pools from Kerry to Donegal. Sisyrinchium is not a grass but a n1ember of the Iris family with small deep-blue flowers. Plants which are widespread in continental Europe and not found in Britain, Inula salicina (Willow-leaved sunflower) and Chara tomentosa (Stonewort), occur on the shore of Lough Derg, in both Co. Galway and Co. Tipperary. The sunflower has decreased in range in the last fifty years and is now comparatively rare. Precise delimitation of geographic groups is not possible. Elements such as the Atlantic and Mediterranean are somewhat confluent. Many alien plants have become established in Ireland. Fuchsia magellanica (Deora De) features prominently in the hedges of west Cork and Kerry and other western counties. It came originally from South America. A creeping willow-herb, Epilobium nerterioides, thrives in wet stony ground in mountain areas n1ainly. It has spread in Europe, having been introduced from New Zealand over a century ago. The Canadian pondweed or water thyme, Elodea canadensis, was first found in waterways in the middle of the last century, it spread rapidly and attained great abundance so as to block canals and rivers. The butterfly bush, Buddlea davidii, a native of China, was introduced into cultivation about l890. It is now naturalised in eighteenth-century basements and in derelict sites throughout Dublin, it occurs also in the environs of Cork. Veronica filiformis with pretty blue flowers is now a serious weed of lawns, difficult to eradicate. The Oxford ragwort Senecio squalidus, occurs on stonework near the railway station at Cork and it also decorates old walls in the Liberties in Dublin, 
The natural heritage of the Irish people, the landscape and all it involves is a blend of landform and scenery, the outcome of geologic forces and of clin1atic factors. The geomorphology of the land was fashioned by nature. Man after centuries of occupation and civilisation has contributed to the cultural landscape. His intrusion apart from modern habitation sites, cities, towns and villages, has, until recent ti1nes, been minimal. The wide variety of the physical landscape of Ireland provides areas of ecological significance and features of unique scientific interest. Bogs, deposits of plant remains of mosses, sedges and other vegetation, compacted into a spongy brown mass, arc characteristic of Ireland. The raised bogs of the Central Plain are large dome-shaped reddish-brown areas with a surface flora of Narthecium ossifragum (Bog asphodel), Andromeda poliJolia (Bog rosemary), Vaccinium oxycoccus (Cranberry), Menyanthes trifoliata (Bogbean, Beaman lachan), Eriophorum angustifolium (Bog cotton, Ceannabhan) and extensive cushions of Sphagnum moss. A Danish scientist, Knud Jessen, who surveyed the bogs of Ireland in 1949, remarked, "the raised bogs ... have a unique and magnificent development in Ireland". The bogs which occur in the west of Ireland are known as blanket bogs, areas of mainly shallow peat dependent on a high rainfall. They bear a similar flora to the raised bogs but Calluna (heath) is more common due to better drainage, and Sphagnum peat moss does not contribute so extensively to the vegetation cover. The Burren, Co. Clare, is an area of 200 square miles of carboniferous limestone, horizontally bedded, terrace above terrace, making a strange and beautiful landscape and the most impressive karstic scenery in western Europe. A Cromwellian is said to have reported on the Burren district that it was a savage place, yielding neither water enough to drown a man, nor wood enough to burn a man, nor soil enough to bury a man.
The Burren, Co. Clare, showing the limestone pavement with deep narrow grykes. Plants grow in the clefts, especially ferns and some flowering plants. 
Rock outcrop and pasture land on the edge of the Burren near Glensleade. Galway Bay is in the distance.  
The limestone pavement areas are a network of fissures and drainage channels, formed through weathering of joints, planes of fracture in the rock which becomes etched into deep chasms. This pavement has an interesting surface morphology which varies from district to district. Pavement patterns can be roughly separated into three types, flat, slab-like pavement with few chasms, pavement which is a close mosaic of fissures and chasms, and rock-shattered pavement difficult to traverse. During the last glaciation the Burren was affected by an ice-flow coming from the north-east. Large boulders of limestone, sandstone and Galway granite, glacial erratics, were carried by the ice from outside areas. The soil covering of varying thickness which lies in the depressions between the rocks and on the terraces bears a plant cover dominated by Sesleria coerulea (blue sesleria), the most abundant and characteristic grass of the western limestones. The vegetation in the Burren is sweet and plentiful and is much in demand for grazing. The chief glory of the Burren is the remarkable flora which in early summer flowers in profusion and transforms the monochrome grey into a colourful rock garden on a grand scale. The background Burren flora is typical of a limestone area in a north temperate, western Atlantic setting. This flora is inset with plants of other geographic groups making a fascinating floristic tapestry, an assemblage of common and rare plants growing together and presenting an ecological puzzle. Here on the shores of the Atlantic grow the southern European plants, Neotinea intacta (Irish or Mediterranean orchid, also called the Denseflowered orchid) and Adiantum capillusveneris (maiden-hair fern) with the Arctic Alpine plants, Gentiana verna (spring gentian) and Dryas octopetala (mountain avens). In The Botanist in Ireland (1934), Praeger writes of the Burren, "Though little but bare rock is visible there is an abundant vegetation, due to the rich soil 
which fills every crevice of the limestone. Though it is waterless-for the rain sinks immediately down innumerable fissures - yet the vegetation is fresh and luxuriant fed by the wet, warm Atlantic winds. Though frost is here unknown, plants characteristic of the high-Alps grow in great profusion, extending right down to sea-level, as in Britain they do only in the extreme north of Scotland and mixed with them are others, unknown in Britain, whose home is on the sunny shores of the Mediterranean". The Burren is remarkable also for the profusion of certain plants which are otherwise sparingly distributed in the country. Plants to be seen abundantly in the Burren include, Geranium sanguineum (bloody cranesbill), Arenaria verna (vernal sandwort), Dryas octopetala (mountain avens), covering large areas and growing over rock outcrops, Saxifraga hypnoides (mossy saxifrage), Asperula cynanchica (squinancy wort), Gentiana verna (spring gentian), in some places a drift of coerulean blue on thin soil, Euphrasia salisburgensis (eyebright), Sesleria coerulea (blue sesleria), Phyllitis scolopendrium (hart's tongue fern) filling grykes with large sword-like fronds and Cererach officinarum (rusty-back fern). Other plants not so widespread but confined to certain areas in the Burren are, Viola stagnina (fen violet), Potentilla Fruticosa (shrubby cinquefoil), Spirea filipendula (dropwort), Epipactis atrorubens (red helleborine), and Neotinea intacta (Irish orchid). None of the plants mentioned is confined to the Burren and all are native. In other limestone districts in Ireland a Burren-type flora occurs, at Lough Carra, Askeaton, Ardrahan and south Donegal about Ballintra. These areas are known as "Burren outliers". The Aran Islands have a similar topography and flora to the Burren, with certain omissions. The islands are administered as part of County Galway but botanically they are included with botanic division 9, Clare. Astragalus danicus (purple milk-vetch), a leguminous plant with purple flowers occurs in Aran and nowhere else in 
Flowers in Ireland
1. Montbretia (Crocosmia crocosmiiflora) 
2. Spring Gentian (Gentiana verna) 
3. Large-flowered butterwort (Pinquicula grandiflora) 
1. Wild columbine (Aquilegia vulgaris) 2. Bloody cranesbill (Geranium sanguineum) 3. Yellow mountain saxifrage (S. aizoides) 4. Mossy saxifrage (Saxifraga hypnoides) 5. Erica cinerea. 6. Sea-pink or Thrift (Armeria maritima) 7. Potentilla fruticosa. 
1. Gorse (Ulex europaens) 2. Saxifraga rosacea. 3. Fuchsia (F. magellanica) 4. Saxifraga nivalis. 
Ireland. It is considered to be a relict species, a plant which had a wider distribution in the past. Large areas of the Burren are covered by hazel scrub, woodland of Corylus (hazel, Coll), accompanied by Euonymus (spindle, Feoras), Cornus (dogwood), Rhamnus (buckthorn) and other small trees and shrubs. In exposed districts the woods are shorn by the prevailing winds. Lakes known as turloughs (Tuar) dry; loch, lake, occur in certain parts of Ireland and are reported from nowhere else in the world. They are periodic lakes, dry for part of the year. They occur as solution hollows in the carboniferous limestone and are situated mainly in areas where glacial drift is absent. Turloughs arc reported from Counties Clare, Galway, Roscomm.on, Mayo, South Donegal, North Tipperary and Kilkenny, and are especially abundant in the Burren. The water in these lakes rises and falls through subterranean passages in the underlying rock. The upper limit of flood is marked on boulders by the dark green moss, Cinclodotus fontinaloides. The vegetation of the floor of the grassy turloughs consists of the following plants, Potentilla a11serina (silverweed, briosclan) which sometimes forms an almost pure sward near the centre of the dried turlough, Viola canina (dog violet), Viola riviniana (common violet), Carex panicea (carnation grass), Mentha aquatica (water mint), Plantago lanceolata (ribwort plantain, Slán lus) and Teucriuni scordium (water germander) with other plants. Some turloughs have a rocky shore-line, thick encrusted with white calcareous shell-marl. Lake-shore vegetation here may consist of Schoenus nigricans (black-headed bog-rush), Cladium mariscus (saw sedge), Carex lepidocarpa(yellowsedge), Ophrys muscifera (fly orchid), Galium boreale (northern bedstraw) and other plants. The Killarney woodlands of native oak and yew with understory of smaller trees or shrubs, as Arbutus (strawberry tree, caithne), betula (birch, beith), Ilex (holly, Cuileann), 
Hedera (ivy, eidnean) and Sorbus (mountain ash, caorthainn) are subtropical in character and have no equal in western Europe. A pronounced feature of the woods is the abundance of the epiphyte vegetation; ferns, mosses and lichens clothe the branches of the trees. Boulders on the floor of the woods are draped with mantles of filmy fern (hymenophyllum) and mosses. The associated flora, particularly the cryptogams, has affinities with the flora of Macaronesia, the islands of the Azores. In recent years the spread of Rhododendron is the cause of some concern as it tends to replace the native flora. The coastline of Ireland offers a variety of landform and habitats throughout its long, indented length. The diversity ranges from straight profile of sand, shingle and saltmarsh on the south Wexford coast, to the rocky headlands, offshore islands and drowned valleys (rias) of west Cork and Kerry, the coral beaches fringing the shores of Mannin Bay, Galway, the grazed drumlins of Clew Bay, Sligo, the majestic cliffs and sandy pastures of west Donegal, the basaltic precipices of Antrim to the Cambrian rocks and sand-dunes of Wicklow. The coral of Mannin Bay is of calcareous red alga (lithothamnion). Salt-marshes form on the flat shores of protected estuaries. The common plants of this habitat include, Sueda maritima (sea blite), Salsola kali (saltwort) and Salicornia europeae (glasswort). Sand-dunes arc found in n1any counties. The vegetation of these includes Viola tricolor (sand pansy), Erodium cicutarium (storks bill), Lotus corniculatus (bird's foot trefoil), Rosa spinosissima (burnet rose), Thymus drucei (wild thyme), Sedum acre (wall pepper) and Ammophila arenaria (marram gras ). This last is most valuable as a consolidator of drifting sand. East coast sand-dunes are more species-rich than those of the west coast and plants such as Scilla verna (squill), Asparagus officinalis) echium vulgare (Viper's bugloss) and Otanthus maritimus ( cottonweed) occur. Sea,...cliffs may 
Part of a turlough riear Mullaghmore, Burren, Co. Clare, with Potentilla fruticosa in the foreground. Terraced limestone hills in the background. 
Lough Derg shore with Scirpus lacustris in deep water, Phragmites and Fraxinus (ash) on the shore. 
provide showy displays of Sedum rosea (roseroot), Matricaria maritima (scentless mayweed) and Armeria maritinia (seapink, Thrift). Grassland is the important landform. Nine million acres occur in Ireland, a country ideally suited to the growth of herbage grasses. There are several types of grassland communities and they are classified on the basis of the dominant species. Although grasses predominate, broadleaved plants also occur as clover, yarrow and buttercups. White clover is the most conspicuous leguminous plant in Irish pastures. Apart from the sites of scientific importance mentioned, places of general botanic interest abound in Ireland. Vignettes of great floristic beauty present themselves in many districts and in every county, making Ireland, "a pleasant place for the botanist." Eskers, glacial deposits of sand and gravel, are common in the midlands. These sinuous ridges, often ten miles long, are severed to allow roadways an east and west passage. In summer, the cut sections carry abundance of ox-eye daisy or noinín mór (chrysanthemum leucanthemum) and brilliant red poppies (papaver). The other plants of the eskers are also a delight and include, Gymnadenia conopsea (fragrant orchid), Anacamptis pyramidalis (pyrarn.idal orchid), Antennaria dioica (mountain cudweed) Blackstonia perfoliata (yellow wort), Gentiana amarella (felwort), Poterium sanguisorba (salad burnet), Briza media (quaking grass) and other plants. The term esker is an anglicised version of eiscir, a word of ancient Irish origin. On journeys through Ireland in late May, thousands of miles of roadway are decorated by cow parsley (Anthrisrns sylvestris). Myriad small white flowers, pentamerous . pieces, delicately held on slender un1.bels, become a moving snowy froth on the passage of transport. Roadside vegetation includes other plants as,
Heracleum sphondylium (Hog weed), vicia sepium (bush vetch), and various grasses with Lonicera periclymenurn (honeysuckle, Taithfheithleann) and Crataegus (hawthorn, Sceach gecil) as part of the arbuscular growth. Hedges are important in that they provide habitats for small mammals, microflora and microfauna, and shelter for rural travellers. In late summer, in the rolling countryside of Carlow, a bus ride enables one to see large crescentic fields of ripening corn, where the yellow-gold spikes of wheat alternate with the chrome-yellow patinas of corn-marigold (Chrysanthenumi segetum). This last plant is known in the County Carlow by no other name than "Mogue Tobin", because a gentleman of that name was driven from his agricultural holding by this persistent weed of cornfields. The quiet watered lands of central Ireland, of stream, canal, lake and bog-pool, are rich in hydrophytes, Pyrola rotundifolia (Wintergreen), Hydrocharis morsus-ranae (frog-bit), several species of Potamogeton (pondweed) and of Equisetum (horsetail), Sagittaria sagitifolia (arrowhead), Baldellia ranunculoides (lesser water plantain) and Scirpus lacustris (bulrush). The bulrush forms extensive growths on the margins of lakes and rivers and is much sought for basketry. Sedges occur in plenty and the area is noted for the variety of species to be seen, Carex linwsa, Carex dioica, Carex diandra, Carex appropinquata, Carex elata, Carex acuta, Carex lepidocarpa and Carex vesicaria. The banks bf small streams and steep railway cuttings in County Cork hold abundance of Euphorbia hyberna (Irish spurge, Bainne caoin). The plant also extends into Kerry and some other southern counties. In late spring, compact plants of citrous-yellow flowers which later in the year contribute to the autumn colouring a reddish-gold, arc an attractive sight. The milky-white juice has a toxic composition and has been used to poison fish. This plant has a western atlantic distribution in Europe and does not occur outside the region, 
Chrysanthemum leucanthemum L. Oxeye daisy, Dog daisy, Noinin mor. An annual plant common throughout Ireland on dry banks, roadsides, eskers and in quarries. It flowers from May to August. 
Phragmites australis is found in pure stands along the canals and on the shores of lakes. It occurs in fossil form in bogs at certain levels in the profile, when the layer is referred to as reed-swamp peat. This grass bears a feathery inflorescence, terminal on tall stems. Lanceolate leaves are borne at intervals, some leaves reflexed by wind movement, some retaining a horizontal stance. In winter, in the sere condition, Phragmites presents an interesting profile as if inviting artistic attention. The people of the Orient, with swift, deft brush work, have immortalised a common plant of their landscape, the bamboo. Praeger writing of the great brown bogland of Connemara tells us that the area is "so filled with lakes and so intersected by arms of the Atlantic that water entangled in a network of land becomes almost imperceptibly land entangled in a network of water ... ".A sheet of water observed, its shore a flat-grazed, dense, mossy-brown carpet of two amphibious algae, Bostrychia scorpioides and Fucus vesiculosus var. muscoides intermixed with sea pink (Arnieria maritima) and sea plantain (Plantago maritima), is revealed by its flora as an inlet of the sea. Another body of water nearby, with a flora of pipewort (Eriocaulon septangulare), water lobelia (Lobelia dortmanna) and rush (Juncus conglomeratus) is of freshwater. The orchidaceous flora of Ireland is noted for Neotinea intacta and Spiranthes romanzoffiana. Another interesting orchid, known as Orchis okellyi, with a spike of white fragrant flowers and unspotted leaves, is found abundantly in the Burren area, an endemic plant. Dactylorhiza kerryensis, bearing dense-flowered purple spikes, occurs in marshy pastures in western Ireland and western Scotland. The Garron Plateau in Antrim, a large flat expanse of bog, 1,000 feet above sea level extending from Garron Point, an abrupt scarp on the shore, to Broughshane in the south-west, is a houseless, treeless, roadless area of small lakes and deep bogs. 
Juniper and alpine club-moss (Lycopodium alpinum) grow on the rocky knolls and two sedges not known to occur elsewhere in Ireland are found here in some abundance, Carex magellanica and Carex pauciflora. The yellow marsh saxifrage, Saxifraga hirculus also occurs, one hundred and fifty miles distant from Bellacorick bog, west Mayo, its only other known station in Ireland. Walls provide a habitat for plants of dry places. Closely fitted stonework is seamed with green lines by a silvery moss, Bryum argenteum which manages to grow in the narrow spaces between the blocks. The loose-textured crumbling walls of nineteenth-century Ireland provide ecological niches for many plants such as, Parietaria diffusa (pellitory), Erophila verna (whitlow grass), Saxifraga tridactylites (rue-leaved saxifrage), Geranium robertianum (herb robert), Sedum album (white stonecrop), Aira caryophyllea (silvery hair-grass), Catapodium rigidum (hard poa), and Ceterach officinarum (rusty-back fern). Near Castlemartyr, Co. Cork, Polypodium australe (polypod fern) on old estate walls, displays serried ranks of fronds along stretches of roadway. There is a tendency in recent times to replace these old walls with lengths of monotonous concrete structures. Continuation of this trend will deprive many districts of an interesting part of their flora. The ferns form a small group in Ireland. One of the most interesting, the Killarney fern ( Trichomanes speciosum) is now a rare plant due to over-collecting in the last century. Other ferns of interest are, Osmunda regalis (the royal fern), common in bog drains, river-banks and in damp woods especially in the west, Pilularia globulifera (pillwort), Cryptogramma crispa (parsley fern), Polystichum lonchitis (holly fern), Thelypteris oreopteris (mountain fern), and Equisetum moorei, perhaps a hybrid, is confined to sand-dunes on the Wicklow and Wexford coast. The cryptogams are another chapter in Irish botany. Marine algae were worked in 
Outline map and list of the forty botanic divisions of Ireland. Based on the thirty-two administrative counties as they were defined in r 896 when Praeger put forward the scheme of biological divisions or vice-county system. Additional units are due to the subdivision of the .five large western counties and Tipperary. The county of Derry, one of the first to be surveyed, was styled, Londonderry, and it is thus referred to in cartographic and scient~fic publications. 
THE PLANTS 
the middle of the last century by William Henry Harvey who carried out his early algological work at Miltown-Malbay and Spanish Point in Co. Clare. Here reef rocks extend far into the Atlantic giving ideal conditions for seaweed growth. Harvey later published, Phycologia Brittanica (1846-1851), Phycologia Australis (1858) and Flora Capensis (1894), the last being the first full treatise on the flora of southern Africa. The lichens of Ireland were studied by Matilda Cullen Knowles from County Antrim at the beginning of this century. The result of her field-work was published as the Lichens of Ireland, a valuable contribution to the flora. Lichens are early colonisers of bare ground. They are sensitive to pollution and are now the subject of special studies. Lichen chemicals are of great interest and have been analysed after careful extraction. Papers on the subject have been published in the Proceedings of the Royal Dublin Society. The distribution of the Irish moss flora is well known due to the early work of Henry William. Lett and of David MacArdle. Recording by bryologists continues to-day. In recent years the bryophyte content of Irish bogs has been the subject of special work. Some species not hitherto known to have been part of the former flora have been discovered in peat profiles. Many of the species found indicate a boreal climate in times past. Topographical botany, or the recording of the detailed distribution of plants, has been carried out in Ireland over a period of two hundred years. One of the earliest botanists, Caleb Threlkeld, may be said to have laid the foundations of Irish botany in his well-known, Synopsis Stirpium Hibernicarum (1726). His work deals with the flora of Ireland in general but has special reference to the plants of the Dublin district. Definite localities for one hundred and forty species of flowering plants and fems are given. In l864, George Dickie wrote the Flora of Ulster in which he 
included also parts of Leitrim, Sligo and Mayo. Two outstanding botanists, A. G. More and David Moore, extended knowledge of Irish plant geography by field work and published the results in Cybele Hibernica in 1864. This work included all the plants recorded in print to that date. The three counties of Down, Antrim and Derry, each with a different geological formation, were the subject of detailed work by S. A. Stewart and T. H. Corry and a publication appeared in 1888 as the Flora of the North-East. County floras were published by Thomas Allin in l883 entitled, The Flowering Plants and Ferns of the County Cork and by H. C. Hart in 1898 on the Flora of County Donegal. In this century three county floras have been written to date, Flora of County Dublin (1904) by Nathaniel Colgan, Flora of County Kerry (1916) by Reginald Scully and the Flora of the County Wicklow (1950) by]. P. Brunker. The best known of Irish field botanists is Robert Lloyd Praeger (1865-1953), a graduate in geology at Queen's University, Belfast, who later became a librarian in the National Library of Ireland. After several years of field-work and plant collecting he published Irish Topographical Botany (1901), his major work on the botany of Ireland. In this treatise Praeger gives short descriptions of the forty botanic divisions followed by the flora list and localities in each division for all but the commonest plants. The botanic divisions are based on the administrative counties as they were defined in 1896, with the further subdivisions of the large western counties and Tipperary. In 1934 a more literary work on the flora was produced by Praeger in the publication, The Botanist in Ireland. In this, areas of high botanic interest are described and a guide to the flora of Ireland is provided for visiting botanists. The work concludes with a census-list of plants, giving, for each species, the divisions from which it has been recorded. An Irish Flora by D. A. Webb, now in its 
Saxifraga spathularis Brot. (Cabaiste daoine maithe, similar to London Pride). A plant of damp rocky places, abundant in the south-west, common in West Mayo and in Achill, also on the Comeragh Mountains. Absent from Britain J N. W. Spain and Portugal. Map shows the distribution of a plant of the Mediterranean element. 
Andromeda polifolia L. (Bog Rosemary). A plant of lowland bogs, frequent in the centre of Ireland where raised bogs occur. 
All maps "by permission of the Botanical Society of the British Isles and Thomas Nelson & Sons Ltd. J taken from their Atlas of the British Flora, 1962, with recent additions compiled at the Biological Records Centre.” 
fifth edition, (1967), is a convenient pocket flora of Ireland. It includes brief descriptions of all the plants and established aliens, with keys to aid in identification. Atlas of the British Flora (1962) provides maps of plant distribution. In this work, the occurrence of a species in a ten kilometre square is indicated by a dot. Transparent overlays make it possible to determine soil preference, altitudinal range and other information. An Irish Biological Records Centre has been set up recently by An Foras Forbartha to map the flora and fauna of Ireland on the ten kilometre National Grid. Phytogeography or plant geography work continues in Ireland to-day. Many botanists are active in the field and the flora is being studied in areas with a view to publication later of county floras. Since Praeger's time some additions have been made to the census-list of flowering plants. Hierochloe odorata (Holy grass) has been recorded from a marsh at the south-east corner of Lough Neagh; Minuartia recurva, previously mentioned, was recorded from the Caha Mountains, between Cork and Kerry; Scheuchzeria palustris, a plant of the lily family, was reported from a bog in Offaly, this has been drained and by agreement among botanists the plant has been transferred to another bog in the same district; Juncus compressus, a round-fruited rush, was collected in alluvial meadows in two localities in the Boyne Valley; Eriophorum gracile, the slender bog cotton, has been recorded from several bogs in west Galway and in Westmeath; Salicornia perennis, a saltwort, was found in saltmarshes on the south Wexford coast. Microspecies and alien plants noted in recent years include, Rumex tenuifolius, a slender-leaved sorrel, Gaudinia fragilis, a grass of poor pastures common in Mediterranean regions, and Juncus planifolius, a rush with grass-like leaves. The repository for the collection of Irish dried plants and for the documentation relating to the flora is at the Herbarium, 
National Botanic Gardens, Glasnevin. Here are housed the collections made by Praeger, Scully, Colgan, Knowles, Lett, Augustine Henry and others. The foreign collection of plants includes specimens from diverse geographic regions. The herbarium also includes information relating to the history of botany in Ireland and to the history of Irish botanists, and examples of botanic art of many Irish artists. Associated with the 500,000 plant specimens is a complementary library. The herbarium and collections are available for study by scientists. The financial columns of newspapers frequently refer to "plant". As a botanist one reacts at once to find that it is a reference to a complex of raw materials/ labour management relations/ production commodity/ packaging for distribution. But how apt is the analogy with the green plant. Hard-headed business-men have subconsciously chosen the word, showing an awareness of the parallel, with a delight in, and an appreciation of the efficient work of the prototype, intake of raw material/ chemical and physical processing/ end product/ packaging for dispersal. Caleb Threlkeld, writing in Dublin in 1726, advised, "the science of Botany is not only generally useful but even absolutely necessary to us mortals". Yet botany has been strangely neglected in Ireland and it is only in recent times that a full realisation of our total flora has crystallised for many people, possibly pollution threats and conservation studies have awakened us from our lethargy. It was not always so, "to seek out and watch and love nature, in its tiniest phenomena as in its grandest, was given to no people so early and so fully as to the Celt. Many hundreds of Gaelic and Welsh poems testify to this fact", so wrote Kuno Meyer in l911. Some verses from a medieval poem translated by Kuno Meyer are rendered by him in English, 
A cup with mead of hazel-nut, bluebells, Quick growing rushes, 
Armeria maritima Willd. (Sea pink, Thrift) A plant of sea cliffs and rocky ledges but also found some miles inland on the western mountains. The map shows a plant of maritime distribution. 
Urtica dioica L. (Nettle, Neanntog). A common plant of roadsides and waste places, also found around dwellings. The map shows a plant of widespread distribution. 
Dun oaklets, manes of briar, Goodly sweet tangle. 
And 
Swarms of bees and chafers, little musicians of the world, A gentle chorus: Wild geese and ducks, shortly before Summer's end, 
The music of the dark torrent. 
All organisms derive their energy directly or indirectly from plants. Each of us goes to work in the morning on a meal of plant or of plant-origin food. The recurring miracle of life and the renaissance each year of the vegetative mantle on earth are more majestic than any mechanical achievement. It behoves us to study and understand the green heritage of Ireland. 
REFERENCES 
ALLIN, T. The Flowering Pla11ts and Ferns of the County Cork. Weston-super-Mare. (1883). 
BRUNKER, J. P. Flora of the Cou11ty Wicklow. Dundalk. (1950). 
CARNEY, JAMES. Medieval Irish Lyrics. 
COLGAN, N. Flora of the County Dublin. Dublin. (1904). 
DICKIE, G. Flora of Ulster. Belfast. (1864). 
HART, H. C. Flora of the County Donegal. Dublin. (1898). 
MACKAY, J. T. Flora Hibernica. Dublin. (1836). 
MEYER, KUNO. Selections from Ancient Irish Poetry, London. (1911). 
MOORE, D. and MORE, A.G. Cybele Hibernica. Dublin. (1866). 
PERRING, F. H. and WALTERS, S. M. Atlas of the British Flora, Edinburgh and London. (1962). 
PRAEGER, R . L. Irish Topographical Botany. Dublin. (1901). 
PRAEGER, R. L. The Botanist in Ireland. Dublin. (1934). 
PRAEGER, R . L. The Way that I Went. Dublin. (1937). 
SCULLY, R . W . Flora of the County Kerry. Dublin. (1916). 
STEW ART, S. A. and CORRY, T. H. A Flora of the North-East of Ireland. Cambridge. (1888). 
THRELKELD, CALEB. Synopsis Stirpium Hibernicarum. Dublin. (1726). 
WEBB, D. A. An Irish Flora. Dundalk. (1967).
