Aye, time to go now. Time for hint to pass through the great white
gate for the last time. The farewells have been spoken, the thanks offered,
the thousand and one things all protocol-fulfilled. The tall old man
looks around for the last time; he looks at the great gracious house
which has witnessed the entrances and exits of men who have held the
fate of mankind in their hands. As ever, the morning flowers are
beautifully arranged. It is July and the flowers are at their best. Has
anyone been forgotten? A last look at the good green fields. A last
look, too, at the tree of bitter memories with its image of a young man's
body prone on the grass. The blue Rolls is outside, waiting, not for
another dutiful appointment but for the final ride out of the Park, out
of the overt Irish tale.
-For me it was not as difficult a road as people imagined.
There was in my blood the confluence of old European alchemies.
From the first moment I left the thatched cottage at Knockmore
and turned my face to the town there was in me something that
cried out for just this destiny and there was in me, too, something
that would one day welcome its coming. It was a sureness, a
certainty, a power that took up its residence in my adolescent
body. I sensed it as I looked at the falling water by the bridge on
the twist of the road in the village of Bruree. I recognized its
presence and I welcomed it. I knew that there resided in me that
intuitive readiness to equal the occasion just as water in an
enclosed U-tube is certain of finding its own level. It did not
come upon me suddenly or overwhelmingly; rather was it a
kind of osmosis that seeped up out of mid- Limerick loam and
became part of my nerve, my sinew, my bone and my blood. An
innate certainty-that is the closest I can come to describing it - the
certainty of the salmon that knows that above the cataract,
above the creaming rapids, above the savagely tilted incline of
broken water in the upper reaches of the stream there was a
calm flat whence one could look back and view the journey
from the sea, through the estuary, through the thousand hazards
of the violent stream. "Born not for self, but for fatherland."
Slan agatsa, a chroí. Agus agatsa! Slan agaibh go leir ! Agus buíochas
ó chroí. The final inevitable house -joke passed. Then the old leader
revolves in the polished hallway and takes the elbow of the soldier.
Somehow he seems conscious that he is revolving. He looks around to
see who is riding with him in the open car for the last time. Ah, yes.
He turns a little. His wife has gone on ahead. Yes. Now he has heard
the cheers from behind the white gate. He bends his head to conceal his
smile. In ainm De bímís ag imeacht. Slán, a Mháirtín ! Slán, a Mháire !
-Thug sibh beirt dílseacht thar dhílseacht dom. Slan, Lieutenant-Colonel
Ruairí. Slan leis le saighdiur a' Daingin ! Colonel Sean's
elbow-just now a true soldier's elbow, for rank seems sloughed and he
served me with dignity and devotion even as I tried to serve the Irish
people.
The first roar from beyond the White Gate, the roar that
greets him who has listened to the trumpeters and taken the
oath. "I lathair De na nUile-Chomhacht, taimse da ghealluint
agus da dhearbhadh go solamanta." Many people in my position
have heard that roar from outside the bars that contain and
protect them and have trembled. A Dhia na Glóire, I welcome it!
It has been with me all my life. It has become part of me. During
this past fourteen years I have had time to reflect on the quality
of the ten thousand crowd-roars of my life. I have grown to be
a fine analyst of applause-I know it when it comes full-throatedly
at me like a welcome and boisterous wave of the sea,
almost sending me sprawling at times. Sometimes I have sensed
in it a note of doubt, of query, of faltering, even of incipient
revolt. Then I have come back here and taking a seat in a quiet
corner, have asked myself: Wherein was I remiss? Has my old
intuition failed me? Once in my folly I spoke my thoughts
aloud: "When I want to learn the will of the Irish people I look
into my own heart." Bhaineadar greann as sin -greann agus
sgig - aithris. And yet any leader worth his salt knows that it is
absolutely true, for in the born leader there is inbuilt a type of
intuitive radar that tells him what menaces lie in the uncharted
waters before the prow of the ship of state. The solitary error
was to tell them! And yet, after the folly-boys had picked the
wishbone clean they conceded the point, tacitly it is true, but
conceded it just the same. But I would advise other leaders in
my position, not to be wholly explicit for this is something the
people do not relish. They must have their lacunae! Much is
lost when the dark side of the moon is photographed, or when the
folk-hero does something so absurdly human that the quizzed
people contort their features in puzzlement, sensing a slight sense
of petty betrayal. And then contrite, I have begun again.
He looks back at the pillared house where duty was a heavy but
welcome burden, wherein walked presidents, kings and queens, cardinals,
crown princes, prime ministers, foreign ministers, secretaries of state,
generals, O Donels of Spain, grand masters and superiors general. A
man, too, who was destined to be Pope. A last wave, not quite accurately
directed at those he wishes it to reach. The rubrics having been fulfilled,
the Rolls Royce crackles on the gravel. Someone tucks a rug about his
knees. He balances the great black hat. Touches the ornamental rope
which has been such a confidant. Time to close the door of the car.
Yet they seem reluctant to do so, for with the first movement, something
is not, as formerly, begun: rather is something ended . ...
Something ended! Something begun! There is a moment of
hiatus as again in memory the individual visitors pass through
this doorway. John F. Kennedy, that great human being, the
warmth of whose personality comforted the peoples of the earth,
General de Gaulle too and the King and Queen of the Belgians;
Prince Rainier and Princess Grace. The memory of semi-known
often eclipsing the memory of the truly great, indigenous
chieftains and intellectuals from the newly-born nations of
Africa as if implying by their visit that the story of our struggle
had given them the hope that some day they too would walk
past their masters without tugging their forelocks in servility.
From Rabal, Nigeria, Ghana. Men also who in composition
controlled the earth and the beliefs of the people who walked
upon the earth. They came from the far east where the capitalist-imperialists
coveted the emeralds and the oil that lay under the
temples. Aye but there was always a steady stream out of Africa:
Ex Africa aliquid semper novi . ...
The White Gates are opened. The great almost Bastille-glad throng
is massed outside. Their banners are aloft. Truculently the stewards are
holding them back. There is a sea of banners. In the rear seat of the
vehicle the old man smiles his old smile. It is as if the tumult is most
acceptable to him. His spectacles hide the true nature of the eyes' feelings
but there is no mistaking the smile grown paternal over the years.
The crowd roars like the sea. A man with a megaphone asks everyone
to keep calm and steady. The crowd surges forward. Almost breaking
the barriers of the rearguard . ...
In essence these, the loyal eighty or eighty-five are my closest
comrades and friends. They would have followed me through
thick and thin whether I was right or wrong. There is a question
I ask myself: do I now pass into legend as did the Blackbird of
Avondale? Am I too close to events to know? If I committed
any crime these the faithful ones would have condoned it. There
was between them and me a chemistry that events had cooled to
something stronger and n1ore durable than steel. No matter how
hard they try, it is difficult for the younger generation to visualize
us, the inevitable old, as wild-eyed young men determined as far
as this island was concerned to overthrow the tower of repression
and to enthrone our new-old identity. In this quest we-I-made
friends and enemies. Who was it has said "The man who lacks
the qualities to make an enemy also lacks the qualities to make a
friend?" And here, too, are the ex-service men of the National
Army. What am I to say except "I respect nobility and integrity."
That I honour those, who compelled by their principles took
their stand even as I was compelled by mine. The old eighty are
here around me-white-haired, fat, bent, crippled, short-sighted,
temporarily forgotten, the often made-fun-of-but they who are
here now wear the mantle of erect dignity as of old. A woman
among them. Of course. Yes, I remember old days in East
Limerick. And as another banner's name is called out to me I
remember Cluain Meala of the Silver Bullet, where Aodh Dubh
broke the steel ring forged by Cromwell, and where Father
Nicholas Sheehy was hanged in 1650. I remember these and
many other things. I do, I do ... indeed.
Now as the throng closes in around the car it seems to be a moment
of sheer menace. The stewards fight back good-humouredly. With
something of the old doggedness they dig their heels into the asphalt.
Old voices are raised in mock-echo of old angers. Banners are waved as
if they were flags. Ireland in microcosm seems determined in its affection
to crush the car. The motorcade is forced to a halt. The man and the
vehicle are at last free of the great sea of people and then the eclipsed
song "Wrap the Green Flag Round Me, Boys ... " breaks out.
Again the people surge forward.
Aye the old songs are now refurbished. No one more than I
realize how these songs have suffered a sea-change. But for a
moment they capture the old magic. The pipers played this air as
a dirge-to offset the Scottish-stolen "The Flowers of the Forest".
I realize that youth is reluctant to accept second-hand idealism,
even old idealism in the image as we fashioned it-for it appears
to render null the power of youth to clothe things in the idealistic
garment of its own weaving. This is something leaders do well
not to forget-for signals of this they must constantly watch out,
so as to find an antidote to their own seizement in stone, in ice, in
steel. And yet, the idealism, when deeply planted, though its
flowering be delayed, its seeds scattered or overlain by the snows
of apathy or hostility, must of its nature shoot up once more - even
as the leather satchels of the cursorily-buried Crappies, who
carried grain for battle commissariat, split at the wet seams, and
the green spears of the wheat of freedom thrust up, marking the
forgotten graves in odd reminder and speaking as emotionally as
poetry to those who come to wonder how freedom finds its
tongue in the simplest phenomena of nature. A ye, the old songs
are in the air here at the white gates, here where we are halted by
the shouting celebrating thousands, celebrating not merely me,
but themselves, their hopes, their fears, their anguishes, their errors
and their exaltations. "And Ireland, long a province, be a nation
once again."
A moment after the great roar breaks like a wave, the car moves
slowly forward. Now in mime, its passage conveys a sense of the
passage through the dutiful difficult years of Presidency. Then it was
also President of the Council of the Assembly of the League of Nations,
and Chancellor of the National University of Ireland. There is now
the crowding together and the frenzied waving of individual slogans in
the vain hope that they will catch the old man's eyes. His companion
in the car recognizes a banner and mentions a name: the old man
raises his eyes as if to view the banner.
Aye, the old banner that as well as being a banner, was a
battlecry. An Clar-what a host of memories it rouses up. An
bhfuil se ann fós? Ar foluain ar cheann na sluaite? "Kincora's
proud halls are gone, yet Clare men still linger on" .... It was a
plain, you understand! And ideas rolled about it like lava and
cooled to pumice on the blue stone. Once the idea captured Clare
it held it as firmly as the terrifying Cliffs of Moher held in their
embrasure the violent sea. Its ancestral words were permeated
with fierceness. Fireball, Tulla' s (Ironic) Children, Brave Blacksmiths,
Dal gCais ... Rineen, aye, and the Dalcassians returning
from Clontarf, their wounded, stuffing their gaping wounds
with sphagnum moss, had themselves bound to stakes and then
asking that their arms be placed in their hands drew themselves
up to meet the native enemy, who in an access of chivalry,
allowed them to pass. Whimsical notions, too, come with the
banner's movement-the old lady of Clarecastle who lifted a
rock to throw it at me. But above all-the Old Clare Shout!
And Clare, too, the county that held the native music, and
that bred O'Curry-man of his hour and John Holland of
Liscannor, pioneer of the submarine, with his amazing boat
called the Fenian Ram. Think of his submerging his crazy
vessel in New York harbour to develop an underwater boat with
the declared object of utilizing it to free Ireland. Dare we forget
this amazing man? Ta muintir an Chlair timpeall orm anois agus
cuimhním ar na hoicheannta fadó fadó go raibh farraigí fairsinge
na dtóirsí timpeall orm. An Clár . . . Snatches of old poems
scream like martins through my memory. "Mary Mother shield
us, say what men are ye?" "O little Corca Bascinn the wild, the
bleak, the fair. . . . " "The treasured wrongs of fifty years are in
their hearts today." "Another Clare is here to lead". "The wind is
from the west and it seems to blow from. Clare". A badge of
pride, of consolation, to have experienced such tumult and to
have known such loyalty. My hope is that the fire will live on
among the ashes, that the seed will live beneath the snows-the
ashes and snows of affluence, of apathy of an internationalism
that is false since it disinherits its own. An Clar! Arduighim mo
lamh chun slan a fhagaint athuair ag muintir an Chlair. .. .
The car comes to a halt. Again the people crush in. Young men and
women climb up precariously and cling to a monument. The old man
in the Rolls Royce shades his eyes and looks anxiously upwards. His
gaze falls. He listens carefully to the speeches. Even in the great span
of the Phoenix Park the crowds are not dwarfed. On a signal, the car
again moves, purrs, inches slowly forward. The crowd is making no
attempt to scatter, but rather is growing more determined to crowd in.
The driver's task is difficult. At last the powerful vehicle makes its
presence felt. Quietly insistent it moves onwards-out of the main gate
of the Park and into Parkgate Street, crosses to the South Quays and,
flanked by its motor cycle escort and trailing its long tail of vehicles,
moves briskly along the South Quay.
Cell 59. I was the last prisoner out of Kilmainham in 1924.
Later I went back and viewed its resurrection-that day the
window sills were deep in snow and the reflected glare was on
the ceilings of the cells. To my left is Arbour Hill and there lie
men whom history vaguely but triumphantly knows but whom
I knew as sentient, sapient and utterly brave comrades.
The Four Courts: "Let History collect the coins and count
them." The bullet holes have been skilfully filled in. I wonder if
the contractors made a paste of crushed granite and tamped it
into place. Skilfully repaired. Inevitable! Back once again in time
would I have acted thus or thus? How fatuous is the historian
with his pitifully simplistic field of vision, his reduction to
formula, his miraculous little ouija board called hindsight. How
could one explain to these people the volatility and versatility of
life; the hearing of the voices of friends that whenever alone with
my thoughts, and tempted to compromise, broke in angrily upon
me, their eyes glaring at me from the shadows? Historians are like
people who compile the form books of horse-races but who
have never smelled the pungency of saddle-soap nor the amoniac
smell of stable. And yet because they deal in names and figures
they imagine that they know all. I once asked a schoolmaster
what my comrades and I had achieved and he said: "You have
reduced the figures of infantile mortality" and went on to say:
"Have you studied the relevant figures of death in infancy from
the Dublin of Sean O'Casey's boyhood? Eh? Ever seen the
pictures of the rag-clad, barefooted, ill-nourished children of the
Ireland of the lock-out and compared them with the children in
the Ireland of now?"
The brain is an odd type of computer. I find myself humming
"The Old Bog Road"-and I recall that one of the first tasks of
my office was to unveil a plaque to Teresa Brayton who made
that little song. In retrospect I'm proud that my very first major
official task in 1959 was Oscailt Oifigiuil Chomhdhail an Leinn
Cheiltigh. Sea, dfhan se sin go buan im chuimhne. Agus an rud
deirionnach a dhein me? Dul siar ads ar ghnó na Teangan d'fhonn
aire a dhiriú ar Chomortas Ghlór na nGael. Ceal spriodalachta,
ceal idealachais, cad ta ionainn ach breagain shuaracha gan anam
gan intinn. Tus agus críoch-an Teanga. Ni fheadar ar thuig siad
cad do bhi i gceist agam? Ta suil agam go dtiocfaidh fear óg fós
in aidhmeannas a dheanfaidh lóchrann na Teangan do lasadh go
buachach ads ....
The motorcade reaches a crowded O'Connell Bridge. The crowds are
gathered here also. The man in the car leans forward and looks up the
great thoroughfare. Once, twice it was gun-pounded into ruins. The
car moves slowly as the crowds again press closer. Waving, waving,
waving. Women with their hands to their mouths. Emotion stilled.
Unprepared. Now the car drives quickly towards the Mills. There the
car stops. The old man descends and walks to the office. Again the
gathered people threaten to crush him with affection.
Revolution is a strange business. How long ago was it we took
possession of these Mills, how many years ago in terms of
measured time, how many centuries ago in terms of political and
social time-lag, how many aeons in terms of what freedom then
connoted? Then there was flour dust in the nostrils instead of the
normal chalk dust. There was also the hoisting of sacks and half
sacks and heeling them off-shoulder to make a redoubt, a body-rest
and a rifle-fork. How many years? Almost an incredible
sixty. Mill, Mills or Bakery, the terminology was always vague:
Mill was possibly accurate in terms of the semantic. Mills was
probably a romantic and revolutionary plural (the Mills of God)
and Bakery was folksy and nostalgic as if revolution were
vouching for the hearth which it would restore in freedom's
name. The old battle-field is now transformed. We enter the
Boardroom. suite for refreshments and then, utmost of ironies, I
sign the Visitors' Book. Revolution is an odd business indeed!
Meanwhile I hear the sea-boom of the crowd outside and I
understand that the flimsy platform is in danger of being tempest-tossed.
I look around me for the last time. Revolt certainly has its
delightful ironies. Time to go. Slan agaibh go leir ! Slan,
beannacht, agus buiochas !
Ta an sean-fhear ag siul tr{d an slua anois. lad ag bru timpeall air.
Dreapann se suas ceimeanna an ardain dheiridh. Ceim ar cheim ar
cheim go curamach mall-thriallach. Thuas, casann se agus feachann se
timpeall ar an slua. Gaireann se. Eiríonn na gartha molta, na gartha
buíochais, na gartha slain. Cuirtear failte roimis. Labhrann cainnteoirí
ar dtus-ceathrar aca-duine aca in ainm gach cuige: "Ar ais imeasc a
mhuintire, " "Ionsparáid" , "Fear uasal," "An méid a rinne tú ar
son na Teangan," "O Chonnacht aniar tugaim beannacht is cead."
Nuair ata deire raite eiríonn an Fear . ...
Chun a theaspaint ... chun a theaspaint ... chun a dheimhniu
cad ar gur sheas me ... b'shin díreach a sheol siar me ar an dturas
deirionnach den Uachtaránacht. An Teanga-thug se sin me go
hOilean Cleire ón speir anuas, go Mainistir na Feile, go Drom, go
Carraigh na bhFear an tSagairtin Dhilis, go Cathair na Mart. Is
leor nod don eolach. . . . Fágaim e sin le huadhacht aca; tugaim
e mar oighreacht don bhfear óg ata gan aithne go fóill. Dearfaidh
me leo gur cheap me uair amhain nach bhfeicfinn Eire saor agus
aontaithe ... nach bhfeicfinn mian mo chroi lem bheo. Ach go
bhfuil me nach mór cinnte anois go bhfeicfidh me e sin! Cinnte
mairfidh an taos óg in oilean a bheidh ina aon. Iarrfaidh me
ortha bheith dílis don tír agus don Teangain agus cuirfidh me mo
bhuiochas in iul dóibh i ngeall ar an ndilseacht domhsa. Then, I
shall recall perhaps what I said elsewhere: "I would rather be
beaten fighting for an Irish-Ireland than to win fighting for
something else." And again "I am fundamentally a countryman",
and finally, "Irish is no mere peasant patois." ...
Agus ansan tiocfaidh me anuas an staighre beag agus raghaidh
me ... abhaile.
It is quite an emotional scene as the old man bids farewell to his
people. It is a very simple ceremony, but despite its overtly partisan
nature it has an air of occasion and indelibility. He speaks in Irish
indicating where the finger-post of his personal loyalty points. The
impromptu platform is small and, fittingly enough, it is not so high as
to hold the speaker aloof from his hearers. Significantly he is once
again part of the people. Many of those present have cameras to their
eyes, capturing the final moment of history so as to illustrate the
history books of tomorrow. Now the little ceremony is almost ended. A
last roar of farewell. Perhaps it brings him back to the great roar of
applause that greeted the ending of his memorable address to the joint
houses of Congress of the United States. The old man, still smiling,
turns from, the three microphones, from the flimsy railing and tries to
find the steps by which he has ascended. He is helped to find them. Step
by step downwards. Step by step. With the final touching of the ground
an era ends .
There is a short symbolic reception at the entrance to the Boro
wherein the old leader is to pass the remainder of his days. The speaker
says, "Welcome among us. We understand that you wish to pass the
remainder of your days in peace, without interviews, without telephone
calls, without visitors, except for those intimate friends whom you
choose to call. We are glad that you and your lovely wife have elected
to live here among us in a spot not far from the sea. We do not wish to
delay you further. Again we assure you of a most cordial welcome.''
Here at last. Anseo sa deire ! Flowers, linen, food. "O to have
a little house ... ". We now move into the dreaminess of a
somnolent Ireland. My duty is behind me. Insofar as a couple
can be free, we are now free. Henceforward I am a spectator of
the nation at whose birth I assisted. I shall watch how it fits into
the pattern of a newly-born Economic Community. I shall probably
dictate my memories. All emotions are behind me now. I
shall watch the wheel of the turning year . .. and shall have magazines
and papers read to me. It will not be easy for me to keep the
faculty of effort alive-this I realize. But I have been spared longer
than most-a bhui san le Dia go bhfuilimid beirt anseo, beo go
fóill. What was it James Connolly said to his wife before his
death? " It's been a good life, Lily". A ye! It's been a good life,
Sinead. The grandchildren will come with their individualistic
conceptions of what is idealistic. Inevitably we shall have to
adjust. Here at last, I smell the not-so-distant sea. It is quiet in the
lodge. I shall have space to walk for as long as my legs bear me
up. A place to sit in the sun and recall my successes and, since I
am human, my failures also. My friends will visit me as will those,
too, in whom enmity has healed. Truly now I am neutralized;
and whimsically I recall that despite all the turbulence and
violence in my life, perhaps my greatest achievement was
neutrality .... When the fire raged round us consuming great
mansions of nations, somehow, somehow I kept it from consuming
the Irish thatch.
B' eigin dom bheith dana ar uairibh, bheith glic ar uairibh,
bheith seimh cneasta ar uairibh. B'eigin dom an uain a mhea
agus a fhios a bheith agam cathain ba choir dom labhairt amach
go hoscailte agus cathain ba choir dom mo bheal a choimead go
feille-bhinn ina thost. Bhí a bhaol fein ag gabhail le gach la
ansin. Ach tagann an ghrian i ndiaidh na fearthainne . . . agus
feach nar badhadh ino mhuintir in am an anaithe.
Peace now at last. No longer the First Participant, the Prime
National Mover, the Initiator nor the Felon sentenced to Death
nor the Escapee from Lincoln Jail. I am now the Observer, the
ex-First Citizen, with honorary capitals it may well be. I stand
above the chess- board of the nation, watching with practised
gaze the movements of the pieces on the board. I may be human
on occasions, such as dinner time on Christmas Day and take out
the gold collar of the Supreme Order of Christ and place it about
the neck of one of my laughing grand- or great-grandchildren.
Time shall pass. The spears of hyacinth and daffodil shall thrust
upwards in the passing springs and once again I shall recall my
boyhood in the Golden Vale and the Eastertime of the Irish
people. Once again in memory I shall hear the waterfall by the
old Mill of Bruree and hear the bells of resurrection rousing out
Dublin City and the sleeping nation. The years shall pass. "Are
you settled in, Sinead?" "Aye. Aye."
Close the door. For the time of year the weather continues to
be broken. Today I have moved through the White Gate, have
moved through cheering crowds, have re-lived again in memory
the Easter turbulence, the peak moments of my life and at last,
at last, have won through to here. It is not, of course, a spacious
place but it is a welcome change from what I have been
accustomed to in the height of my career. And it is tidy, beautiful
and fitting. We are here among our own people. For that - buiochas
le Dia. So close ... the ... door and let us here alone
with the mighty harvest of our memories.
