"Mayo, God help us!"-"Galway,
glad to get us!" This piece of
traditional dialogue like many
another scrap of folklore contains more
than a grain of truth. It is peculiarly accurate
as a summary of the respective attitudes of
the Galwayman and the Mayoman. The
Galwayman is superior and condescending
towards his more impoverished neighbour.
The Mayoman, slow-speaking, quiet and
determined, knows his worth and cases
himself to a prominent position in the next
county or farther afield. He may be a slow
tarter but often wins the race.
Mayo is a large county, with its long
island-studded coastline facing the broad
Atlantic, turning its back on the rest of
Ireland. It is a world in itself, containing all
the varieties of Irish scenery, and perhaps
here lies the clue to the self-sufficiency of
the Mayoman. He has it all at his doorstep,
with views as beautiful as anything in
Kerry, Donegal, or even Galway, and only
pulls up his roots when ambition drives
him, resolving the while to return again
when his money is made, for he knows
there is no place like home. Raftery
immortalized this sentiment when the
coming of spring turned his thoughts to
his native Killedin.
Mayo-"Plain of the Yew Trees"-that
noble tree which is according to Cormac
Mac Airt one of the most lasting things in
the world. Alas for Cormac, there are few
enough of them left now. There is one at
Kilvonell Castle, home of the Bourkes,
but it would be hard to find others except
in graveyards and certain old gardens. It is
difficult to imagine that there were once
great forests of yew in Ireland. Indeed it is
difficult to imagine that there were once
great forests of any species in Ireland. We
have some indigenous forest still in Mayo -
Old Head and Brackdown are examples - but
the final destruction of the old trees
came in the seventeenth century with the
proliferation of ironworks. The forests are
rising again in Mayo as elsewhere-great
serried ranks of conifers marching over the
countryside. We welcome them, but they
are gloomy places compared with the light
and shade of a deciduous wood, more
conducive to tales of trolls and hobbits,
than Fenian romances or the earlier nature
poems extolling the song of the blackbird
or the lowing of the stag.
There are traces of our forests in our
bogs-the 'bog dale' of the countryman - and
this is the only timber he is likely to
convert to his own use. The bogs themselves
cover a great deal of Mayo, and there can
be few places as bare, bleak and barren as
the area from Mulrany up to Bangor Erris.
This is the nearest thing we have to a desert
in Ireland. These bogs are a recent development
in historical terms. They are a mere
2,000 years old, and up in north-east Mayo,
near Ballycastle, traces of farms that preceded
the bogs have been found under the
turf. Traces of what may have been a
neolithic house have been found in the
same region, which had been preserved
through the ages, because later settlers had
built a passage grave over them.
These bogs are proving a fruitful area
for research in Glenamoy. There is no easy
solution to the problem of the best utilization
of this most plentiful natural resource,
whether it be its conversion into pasture,
wood-land, or game preserve. The old use
is likely to be with us for a long time still,
with the blue smoke and the turf stack
beside the door, although coal and bottled
gas are now finding their way into strange
places.
Another natural resource is the object of
study at Lough Furnace where there is a
saln1on research station. There are two very
beautiful lakes here, but there are lakes
round every corner in Mayo. They must
cover nearly as large an area as the bogs.
They are often associated with hills, so that
every lake shore makes a perfect picture
with its attendant backdrop of mountain
and cloudy sky. There is an extraordinary
moonlike landscape of bleak hills and small
lakes around the road beyond the research
station at Furnace.
Lough Mask is the greatest of the Mayo
lakes. Take any of the little roads to the
'piers' on this lake, and you will find yourself
in another world. Strange porous rocks,
crystal clear water, a ragged fringe of hazel
and birch. There is a peace in these places,
so different from the seashore. It is a peace
beloved of our ancestors for it is in these
places we find the old abbeys and castles.
The early settlers stayed near the coast,
and the north-west coast fom Doonamo
Point to Downpatrick Head is rich in forts,
of which Doonvinalla near Portacloy and
Doonbristy near Downpatrick are perhaps
the most impressive. This is a spectacular
area of wild beauty with enormous rugged
cliffs and magnificent views. There is
nothing quite like it in the rest of Ireland
for sheer savagery, and one can only
marvel at the fortitude of the men who
built there.
The early Christian monuments are on a
smaller scale, and more common near the
lakes than near the inhospitable north-west
coast. Some of the early Christians ventured
as far as the offshore islands, and there are
traces of their settlements on Inishglora,
Inishkea North and South, and Duvillaun
More. Saint Patrick is, of course, the special
pride of Mayo. Tradition has it that about
the year 443 he came west to visit his flock
and to found new churches. He came
through Ballyhaunis, Kilmaine, Ballybourke,
Ballyheane and Aughagower. After
his fast of forty days on Croagh Patrick he
went back to Meath through Aughavale,
Ballintubber, Kilmeena, Turlough and
Manulla. He made a later visit to establish
the faith in Tirawley and then proceeded
northwards to Ulster. The annual pilgrimage
in his honour to the summit of the
Reek, made on the last Sunday of July, is a
big event in the lives of the men of the
west, and one not likely to be forgotten by
those who participate in it. The ancient
pilgrim road or Tóchar Phadhraic, which
led from Ballintubber via Aughagower to
the Reek can still be traced.
The Danes made incursions into Mayo
but nude no settlements in the county.
One of the islands in Clew Bay-Iniscoitil
-is associated with them, Caitil being the
Irish form of a Danish chieftain's name.
There is a famous miracle associated with
Saint Brendan and a Danish incursion of
A.D. 812. The O'Malley family had been
reduced by the invaders to some women
and a weakly male child. The mother
prayed to the saint at his well in Killeen,
and through his intercession the child was
Turlough Round Tower, not far
from Castlebar.
restored to health and the family thereby
saved from extinction. There is a very fine
stained-glass window by Evie Hone depicting
the story in the little wayside church
at Kilmilkin, over the border in Co.
Galway.
The round towers are popularly associated
with the Danes, and although they
are not very numerous in the county, there
are some examples still there. The towers
at Aughagower and Turlough are particularly
fine, and probably date from the
tenth century. The tower at Turlough,
three miles from Castlebar, is romantically
sited on a hillside in pleasant wooded
country opposite the French chateau-style
residence of the FitzGeralds.
The coming of the Normans brought
great changes to the area. The first to come
were the Butlers, but they were driven out
by the O'Connors. They were succeeded
by the great de Burgos, who became the
predominant Mayo family by the fourteenth
century, a predominance which
they were to retain until the end of the
seventeenth century.
The principal native families in the area,
apart from the royal O'Connors, include
O'Heyne, O'Flaherty, O'Kelly, O'Malley,
O'Dowda, O'Hara and O'Gara. Of these
the O'Malleys are perhaps the best known,
largely because of their reputation as seamen
and their ability to survive through the
plunder of shipping and raids on enemy
territory. The legendary Grace O'Malley
lived in Carraig an Chabhlaigh Castle on
the shore of Clew Bay near Westport. This
small tower has been restored and affords
the visitor a rare chance of imagining what
it was to be a sixteenth- century chieftain
in a remote part of Ireland. Other O'Malley
castles are along the coast from Inishbofin
to Achill.
Grace O'Malley was quick to see the
Doo Lough in the south west of the county.
advantage of an alliance with the powerful
de Burgos, and married Riocard an Iarainn
Bourke of Burrishoole. Her son, Tiobóid
na Long, became the first Viscount Mayo
and is buried in Ballintubber, where his
tomb can be seen in the sacristy of the
restored abbey church, one of the showpieces
of the county. In this abbey we can
study the course of Irish ecclesiastical
history, from 1216, the date of its foundation
by Cathal Crobhdearg O'Connor,
down to the present day. It has suffered
through the centuries from fire and sword,
from Cromwellians and Penal Laws, from
official persecution and popular poverty.
But the abbey church somehow managed
to survive as a centre of Catholic worship,
and here, instead of the usual melancholy,
if picturesque, ruin, we have an unique
example of a medieval Irish church where
the Faith is still being practised.
Cong abbey, which may also have been
an O'Connor foundation, is situated in this
most attractive of Mayo villages. Here as
in Ballintubber and Inishmaine, the delicate
stone carving is typical of a school of
western stone masons whose work is among
the finest executed in Ireland. The village,
tranquil and unspoilt, between Lough
Corrib and Lough Mask, is surrounded by
an idyllic countryside abounding in
antiquities.
Perhaps the most beautifully situated of
all the western abbeys is Burrishoole, a
fifteenth-century foundation by Richard de
Burgo, for the Dominicans. It is beside a
peaceful inlet of the sea, near a many-arched
stone bridge over the water from Loughs
Furnace and Feeagh. This place is full of
romance. The founder's son, Riocard an
Westport House, one of the finest buildings of its period west of the Shannon.
Iarainn, was married to Grace O'Malley
who lived in nearby Carraig an Chabhlaigh.
His daughter by his first marriage, Honora
de Burgo, lived with Honora Magaen, in a
building attached to the abbey as members
of the Third Order of Saint Dominick.
They fled to Saints' Island in Lough
Furnace when the abbey was attacked by
the Cromwellians in 1653. They were
discovered by the soldiers, beaten and
brought ashore. A maidservant brought
Honora de Burgo and laid her before the
altar at Burrishoole, where she found her
sometime later, dead but kneeling in a
position of prayer. Honora Magaen fled
from her captors and hid in a hollow tree,
where she was discovered frozen to death
the next day. This event was reported to
the General Chapter of the Dominicans
held at Rome in 1656, and was commemorated
by an artist, who about that
time painted seven saints of his Order in
the cloister of the Dominican Convent in
Taormina, Sicily. This fresco still exists but
the convent is now a hotel. The late Mr.
Sean T. O'Kelly said he had seen this fresco
when, as President, he unveiled the shrine
erected by the people of Burrishoole in
memory of the martyrs on 8 June, 1953.
This all took place in the seventeenth
century when the old order was passing
away all over Ireland. The castles and
abbeys were crumbling together with the
Irish and old English families who had
erected them. But here in the far west there
was a time lag, and the quiet tenacity of
the Mayoman made him cling to his old
stones longer than most, so that we find
that there is a lone Friar Horan still living
in the Burrishoole area in 1830.
That there was still some fight left in the
old families in the seventeenth century is
proved by the Bourke and O'Malley
regiments in the Jacobite War. They were
never to rise again, however, and their
failure to cope with the new order made
them an easy prey to the next invaders, who
through confiscation and business acumen
drove them from their strongholds forever.
Some through marriage alliances with the
newcomers, or by conforming to the
Protestant religion, managed to preserve a
few tattered remains of their possessions,
but the majority waited silently until one of
their number, Michael Davitt, founded the
movement which was ultimately to change
the face of Ireland by restoring the land to
the people.
A new English family which joined the
struggle against William of Orange, and
yet managed to survive to the present day,
was that descended from John Browne of
the Neale, sheriff of Mayo and Ormond' s
agent, who was killed in 1589 by a force
under Riocard an Iarainn near the Leap at
Furnace. Colonel John Browne, ancestor of
the Brownes of Westport, played an active
part on the Jacobite side during that struggle,
and proved himself an able businessman in
the process. He held a prominent position as
Lord Lieutenant of the county. He supplied
the army with iron from his ironworks,
and when the Jacobite army was driven
west of the Shannon he was commissioned
to supply men and provisions to the few
remaining garrisons. As a barrister he
helped to draw up the Articles of the Treaty
of Limerick, and had the distinction of
having an Article devoted entirely to his
interests, by which he was to be repaid for
the debts he had incurred with Protestants
for goods he had commandeered for the use
of the Jacobite army. However, very little
of this money was ever collected, and the
Colonel spent the rest of his life struggling
to pay his debts. He was the first of the
family to move from Kinturk to Westport,
where the present Westport House remains
In Westport House hangs this picture of
Maude Bourke, great, great grand-daughter
of Grainne Uaille, a lady of many famous
exploits and of daring sea raids.
the most magnificent Georgian house west
of the Shannon.
The Jacobite war was the last time that
the people were to be led by members of
the old Catholic families. After that the
new property owners stayed firmly on the
side of the Protestant government, and consolidated
their wealth at home and overseas
in an expanding British Empire.
The next popular revolt, the Rising of
1798, was led by John Moore, who was
elected President of the Republic of
Connacht following the French landing
at Killala. His family had only recently
returned from Spain where they had made
a fortune in the wine trade and built the
famous Moore Hall, now a melancholy
ruin on the shores of Lough Carra. He died
in captivity in Waterford in 1799, whence
his remains were removed and reinterred in
Castlebar beside the 1798 memorial. A descendant
of his, George Henry Moore, M.P.
for Mayo, is remembered for his generosity
during the famine years, and for his leadership
in the Tenant-Right Movement. His
son, George Moore, the novelist, is perhaps
the best known member of the family
outside the country. His ashes are interred
beneath a cairn on an island in his beloved
lake.
Mayo gave Ireland another leader in
1916, Major John Mac Bride of Westport,
whose wife Maud Gonne was so admired
by Yeats. This veteran of the Boer War
was one of those executed after the
Rebellion and interred at Arbour Hill. His
county remained faithful to his ideals in the
stormy years which followed, and remembering
John Moore, helped once more to
set up another republic. The troubled times
are over now and the quiet, determined
people of Mayo have come into their own
at last.
Sunset on Lough Conn, Pontoon.
