Charlotte Grace O Brien
came of the great O Brien family of
Thomond. For some 900 years the
O Briens had been dominant in that part of
Ireland, first as kings or chiefs under the old
Gaelic order; later as resident landlords
owing allegiance to the British crown. A
baronetcy had been conferred on them in
the reign of King William III.
The family residence had for centuries
been at Dromoland, Co. Clare. Sir Lucius
O Brien, the third baronet, was a member
of Parliament, and was one of those
responsible for the establishment of
Grattan's Parliament.
Sir Lucius died in 1797, and was succeeded
by his son, Sir Edward. It was the period
leading up to the Union, and although the
financial affairs of his estate were anything
but satisfactory, Edward O Brien refused to
profit by the opportunity to replenish his
coffers which the Union negotiations
offered. Spurning bribes and all kinds of
opportunity for personal advancement, he
voted against the Union.
Of the O Briens of Dromoland, Stephen
Gwynn-whose father was married to
Charlotte Grace O Brien's sister-had this
to say :
"These people were loyalists and Protestants;
but their loyalty was to the king of
Ireland; their life, in so far as it was
carried outside their own county, centred
in the Irish metropolis. The Union shifted
that centre, and many things with it". [note: CGOB, p. 51.]
Perhaps that reference to loyalty to the King
of Ireland calls for a little clarification. It
meant loyalty to the British monarch in
his assumed capacity of king of Ireland.
Sir Edward O Brien's financial affairs
took a decided turn for the better when he
married Charlotte Smith, daughter of a
large creditor, William Smith, who waived
the mortgages on the Dromoland property.
The first son of the marriage was Lucius;
the second son was William, the man who
is known in Irish history as William Smith
O Brien. William Smith provided for his
grandson William by settling upon him
his own property of Cahermoyle, in Co.
Limerick. [note: ibid, p. 5.]
By a coincidence, Cahermoyle had
belonged two centuries earlier to a kinsman
of the Dromoland family, Sir Daniel
O Brien, of Carrigaholt, in West Clare. Sir
Daniel had been a prominent Catholic
leader in the war against Cromwell in
Ireland; and after the Restoration he was
nude Viscount Clare as a reward for his
services to the Stuart cause.
His descendants were those Lords Clare,
who, in the eighteenth century, won undying
fame with the Wild Geese at
Ramillies, and Fontenoy, and a score of
other battlefields-
When on Ramillies' bloody field,
The balfied French were forced to yield,
The victor Saxon backward reeled
Before the charge of Clare's dragoons.
Cahermoyle next came into the possession
of John Bourke, a leading Catholic
merchant, and patron of the famous poet,
Daibhl Ó Bruadair. Ó Bruadair's references
to Cahermoyle are numerous. To him it
is: "brogh aolta an dreagain duasaigh"-the
lime-white mansion of the bounteous
hero-; or "Cathair Maothal na miadhmholt"
-Cahermoyle rich in flocks-; or, again,
Cathair Maothal dún na ndeoradh
Dia go ndiona
-Cahermoyle, loved by lonely strangers/
God protect it ever.
John Bourke's wife, Anna, was one of
the O Hurleys of Knocklong, Co. Limerick,
the family to which the martyred Archbishop,
Dermot O Hurley belonged.
Bourke was one of the Catholic gentlemen
of County Limerick who suffered in the
"Popish Plot" scare, which brought the
martyr's crown to Blessed Oliver Plunkett. [note: Romance of the O Brien Name, article by "Mac Casnaidh" (Gearóid Mac Spealain), Irish Press,
9/2/1950.]
Today, Cahermoyle is a novitiate for the
Oblate Fathers, who purchased it in 1920
from the painter, Dermod O Brien,
Charlotte's nephew.
Sir Lucius O Brien, the fifth baronet, did
not care to go to Westminster, but the
representation of the county town of Ennis
devolved upon the second son, William
Smith O Brien. Smith O Brien entered
Parliament in 1826, a moderate man, and a
supporter of the Union. [note: CGOB., p. 64.] He lost his seat in
183l, but was re-elected for Co. Limerick
in 1835. In Westminster Smith O Brien was
soon to be disillusioned; he discovered it to
be "an assembly deaf and blind to the stir of
those forces which were represented by
O Connell". [note: ibid, p. 6.] By l844 he was siding with
O Connell in the demand for Repeal of the
Union. By 1846, however, he was
disappointed with O Connell, and was one
of those who that year broke with O Connell
at the famous Conciliation Hall meeting.
The others who left Conciliation Hall on
that occasion included Charles Gavan
Duffy, Thomas Francis Meagher and John
Mitchel. From now until the fateful year of
l848 Smith O Brien's lot was to be cast
with the Young Ireland movement. He
became a regular contributor to The Nation,
the paper which had been founded by
Davis, Dillon and Duffy, and because of the
historic Gaelic family to which he belonged
was considered a decided acquisition to the
nationalist cause.
In 1832 Smich O Brien had married Lucy
Gabbett, who was to bear him five sons
and two daughters. The younger of the two
daughters was born on 23 November, 1845.
She was Charlotte Grace O Brien, the
subject of this article. We are told: "She
was too young to remember how the
leaders of the Young Ireland Party came to
Cahermoyle-in the days before the Rising
-brave in their green uniform". [note: ibid, p. 96.] But
perhaps she remembered something of the
tragedy of the Great Famine that struck at
that time.
On 29 July, 1848, Smith O Brien led an
abortive Rising at Ballingarry, in Co.
Tipperary. He was captured, tried for high
treason, and sentenced, in October, 1848,
to be hanged, drawn and quartered. A writ
of error was moved, and final judgment
was not obtained from the British House of
Lords until May, 1849, when the sentence
was confirmed, but commuted by the
Crown to transportation for life. On
29 July, 1849, the ship that carried him and
three comrades set sail for Freemantle.
From the time of his arrest up to the time
of his transportation Smith O Brien had
been lodged in Kilmainham Jail, and during
that time his family took lodgings close to
the jail, in order to be near him. Charlotte
must have retained memories of those days
spent near Kilmainham, when her father's
life hung in the balance. Her younger
brother, Charles Murrough O Brien, who
was to be her playmate, had, in fact, been
baptised within the walls of the prison.
And so Charlotte's early years were overshadowed
by the trial and banishment of
her father.
Life must have been difficult too for Lucy
O Brien after her husband's transportation.
She had the affairs of the estate to manage,
and seven young children to rear. Added to
these difficulties was the fact that her
husband's action in leading an armed up rising
for Irish freedom had met with the
violent disapproval of all his relations, and
had horrified all those who comprised the
social circle within which she and her
husband had moved and had lived their
lives. [note: ibid, p. 10.] But she continued to be a loyal and
devoted wife to him. Charlotte pays tribute
to her in a poem called The Mother:-
O'er all our lightsome life the watchful eye
Was still our mother's; ever gay and brave
She rose triumphant o'er grief's deepest wave.
Oh! think of her-her husband judged to die,
To death in its ghastliest form: but strong and
high
She stood by that great heart to whom she
Clave,
Honouring the last and noblest word he gave,
When, death refused to him, exile drew nigh.
This was that faithful, true and high
command"
Leave me, my wife, go back to our estate,
Back to our poor, home to our broken land,
This is our first best duty, this your fate - And
as for mine, God knowing what it may
be,
I leave my people and my sons to thee."
During all those trying years the O Briens
of Cahermoyle maintained a very close
relationship with their cousins, the O Briens
of Dromoland. Stephen Gwynn tells us that
Sir Lucius O Brien's house at Dromoland
was a kind of second home for all the clan.
"In the pinch, after the Famine,
mortgage annuities could not be paid, and
the O Briens made a common purse and
lived at Dromoland, whole families together
for months at a time". [note: ibid, p. 10.]
Charlotte was later to recall in a sonnet
those happy days spent at Dromoland:
Across the wastes of long - drawn years I gaze
On one bright hour when eye's bright
sunshine glowed
On thine high-towered beautiful abode)
Dromoland! There I see thy pleasant ways,
Thy terraced walks, and above all a blaze
Of light - stemmed double poppies thickly
Sowed,
On which old Mother Nature had bestowed
A very wealth of white and rosy rays.
My little skirt I held before me straight
To catch those dainty flowers as they were
thrown
To me in hanqfuls by a dame of state,
Who, when their lovely petals were fullblown,
Drew from, their juices the Lethean stream
To hide harsh pain in some bewitching dream.
One of Charlotte's published volumes of
verse was entitled Cahermoyle. One might
call that volume a collection of fond and
youthful memories of a well-loved home
and neighbourhood. She favoured the
sonnet form for her poems, and could paint
some very faithful pictures of rural life
within the confined lin1its of a sonnet's
fourteen lines, as a typical composition, the
Hay-Field, shows:
Gaily through the meadows rich and dry
Goes the sharp scythe, swishing long and
loud.
Girls and merry boys clustered in a crowd
Are tossing, tossing, tossing up on high
The rich, sweet-scented green swathes where
they lie.
The hot sun is regnant, and the bowed
Great arch of heaven fleckless of a cloud,
And the sweating mowers cast their garments
by.
But, hark! sweet voices, clear and pure and
Young,
Sings the dear songs of Erin and of home,
Sing of the loved ones fat across the foam,
Sing the old notes to which the old hearts
Clung,
Old hearts, old heads, there bending, worn
and grey,
Twisting sougawns from forth the scented hay.
Though preferring to express herself in
verse in her youth, Charlotte wrote at least
one prose sketch, a piece entitled Paddy
Kiely. This piece tells of her friendship with
Paddy, a workman employed at Cahermoyle.
Paddy used to tell her ghost stories.
"Paddy, tell me did you see the fairies
today?" she'd ask. In that sketch, even in its
recollected childhood conversations, we
still get the impression of a person of spirit.
When Paddy dawdled about commencing
a story he was told: ''I'll pinch you to
death, Paddy, if you go on humbugging
along this way! I'll just get a great pin and
stick it into you. I'll knock the hat off you!"
Smith O Brien was released in 1854, but
a condition of his release was that he would
not return to Ireland. His family joined him
on the Continent, living in Brussels until
1856, when the condition of exile was
withdrawn, and he was free to return to
Ireland. But things would never be the same
again for him after his return to
Cahermoyle.
Immediately after he had made the fateful
decision to lead a Rising in 1848, Smith
O Brien, in order to avoid confiscation, had
assigned his property to trustees for his wife
and children. Now, when he came back to
Cahermoyle, he found himself bound by
that arrangement, "and he felt it-being a
very proud man-as a restriction on his
freedom. The weight of his resentment fell
upon his eldest son, Edward, then a grown
man. It was a cruel tin1e for all, husband,
wife and son . . . ". [note: ibid, p. 28.]
His wife died in 1861, and he removed
with his daughters to Killiney, near Dublin.
Charlotte was then sixteen years and her
schooling was in the hands of a private
tutor, Miss D'Arey, who, we are told, was
"a lady of good Irish family". [note: ibid , p. 32.] Two years
later Charlotte was back in Cahermoyle
with her tutor, "turning her hand, not very
prosperously, to the task of house-keeping
for her brothers, Edward and William, and
for the youngest, Charles-always her
closest companion . . . ". [note: ibid , p. 32.]
Meantime it was agreed that Edward
O Brien should take over the estate, should
pay his father £2,000 a year, and should
keep open house for his brothers and sisters.
This arrangement must have proved a
difficult one for Edward, for it came on the
eve of his marriage to Mary Spring Rice,
sister of Lord Monteagle, who resided at
Mount Trenchard, on the banks of the
Shannon, a few miles west of Foynes.
Edward O Brien's wife was one of a trio
of well-known members of the Mount
Trenchard family who bore the name Mary
Spring Rice. The mother of the poets
Aubrey and Stephen de Vere was a Mary
Spring Rice. And then there was the Mary
Spring Rice who sailed with Erskine
Childers on the yacht Asgard which brought
the guns ashore at Howth in 1914 for the
Irish Volunteers.
In 1864 Smith O Brien's health began to
fail, and he moved from Dublin to Wales
to get rid of threatening bronchitis-his
complaint, really, was heart trouble. He
refused to see a doctor during the weeks he
lingered in a hotel in Bangor. Charlotte,
who had been with him during those last
weeks, was at his bedside when he died. His
body was brought back for burial at
Rathronan, near Cahermoyle, and the great
concourse present at his funeral testified to
the esteem in which he was held by the
ordinary people, for whose cause he had
suffered so much.
His death took from Charlotte the one
who most needed her care, thereby causing
a certain blank in her life. Stephen Gwynn
tells us that "it was her nature to need to be
needed", [note: ibid, p. 34.] and so she went back to take up
her home at Cahermoyle with her eldest
brother and his newly-married wife, not
without some natural fear that she might
find herself unneeded. But she needed not
to have fears on that score, for relations
between the sisters-in-law were, and continued
to be, the happiest imaginable. Two
daughters and a son were born to Edward
and Mary O Brien.
One of the daughters, Nellie, who was
the elder, was later to make her mark on
the Irish scene, as, indeed, was also her
brother, Dermod. Nellie learned Irish
fluently, and was a very close friend of
Douglas Hyde, and an indefatigable worker
in the cause of the revival of the Irish
language. In Dublin she founded the well-known
branch of the Gaelic League, Craobh
na gCuig gCuigí, the majority of whose
members were, like Nellie herself, Protestants.
She also founded Colaiste Eoghan Uí
Chomhraí (the O Curry Irish College) in
Carrigaholt, in south-west Clare, a district
which was once the patrimony of that
celebrated branch of the O Briens that produced
the Lords Clare of Wild Geese fame.
Founded in 1911, and named after a famous
west Clare scholar, Coláiste Uí Chomhraí
still continues very successfully the task
Neilli Ni Bhriain set it more than sixty
years ago.
Nellie's brother, Dermod, was the famous
painter and member of the Royal Hibernian
Academy, and many of his paintings reflect
the Limerick landscape he knew and loved
so well-one thinks of that he named
Bringing home the cows to be milked.
The third member of the family was
Mary O Brien, who later married in
England. After the birth of Mary her
mother fell into ill health, and there
followed two years of lingering on the
Riviera. Charlotte was with her, and
remained with her until her death in 1868.
Charlotte, then twenty-three, undertook
the care of Mary and Edward's three
children, with a passion of devotion that
was later to echo in the following lines:
O mother, who bade me a mother prove
To thy dear babes, did I not give my love,
My whole, my deepest heart to thee and
thine.
After the return from the Riviera the
O Briens lived for some years at Corgrig,
between Foynes and Mount Trenchard,
while the old Cahermoyle was being pulled
down and replaced by a new and more
stately home. In the meantime Charlotte's
eldest sister, Lucy, had married the
Reverend John Gwynn, Dean of Raphoe,
who was residing near Ramelton, Co.
Donegal. Charlotte and the young O Briens
used sometimes visit them.
Although Edward O Brien, and more so,
his brother William, were punctilious and
punctual almost to excess, Stephen Gwynn
found that:
"Charlotte, on the other hand-a big,
large-boned woman, rough in her movements-
could not enter a room without
knocking things down, and as a girl, had
been the despair of those who wished her to
tie her bootlaces. It was a tradition in the
family to despise dress and fashions; and I
suppose two homelier women in point of
clothes than she and my mother never
lived ... [note: ibid, p . 37.]
"Charlotte O Brien's light brown locks
were always in admired disorder; her broad
square figure-which had something of a
peasant woman's dignity in its carriage - was
loosely garbed in garments of her own
making; and she never had the gift of
delicate finish ... ". [note: ibid, p. 37.]
In politics, too, Charlotte differed from
her brother, Edward; she holding by her
father's beliefs, he by a somewhat aggressive
utilitarianism. [note: ibid, p . 38.] She had begun to write,
and though her brother greatly admired
her talents he wanted more finish and form,
in her work. By this time, too, Charlotte
was suffering from growing deafness, an
affliction that was to try her very much for
the rest of her life.
Charlotte was very popular with the
ordinary people, whether they were the
people of her much-lived Cahermoyle, or
the people of the Corgrig district, or those
whom she came to know later in the
neighbourhood of Ard- an- Oir. She,
obviously, was a good mixer. She was an
attractive and vivacious girl, and participated
in the various activities of the estate. She
visited the homes of neighbouring farmers
and labourers, and maintained a benevolent
interest in their affairs throughout her life. [note: Charlotte Grace O Brien: Her Life of Integrity and Active
Goodness, article by Liam O Shaughnessy, in Limerick Leader, 5/4/1958.]
In an essay called Pastoral Memories she
tells us:
"I recall from the early days of my own
life (I can remember just after the great
fan1ine) the farm life in the cottages round
my home. I was then a very independent
little fair-haired mortal, and was very much
given to trotting off through the fields quite
alone to my farm friends. Well, they did
welcome me! The bowls of cream and solid
sour milk, which I liked so well, that I got
through were surprising. There was the
dark but clean dairy, the large, dark thatched
kitchen, with the old palsied mother in the
corner, and two or three fine, handsome,
buxom girls. There was the big spinning
wheel, and many a time I tangled and broke
the woollen thread. But they had patience.
Everything I might do they had patience to
suffer. Time was no great value, and the
skein was easily joined by the skilled hand
of the spinner.
"But even to my child eyes a tragedy was
wrought into the spinning and the bending
of that woman's hands about the wool. Her
daughter had run away with a soldier.
Though, I think, they married, the prejudice
against soldiers was then very strong,
and it simply broke her mother's heart. Her
face has remained with me throughout life
a revelation of the pain of a mother's love ;
a thing beautiful and terrible.
"But the shadow of the flowering limes
was all over, and hanging in the branches
thereof I seem to see a dainty snow-white
cloth full of cream slowly dripping away
its superfluous moisture, slowly hardening
into the delicious solidified happiness called
a cream cheese ... Ivory white, exquisite in
texture, delicately suggestive of all green
fresh things-beautiful to look at and
perfect to the taste. It seems to me we lived
on cream and cheese in old times; now they
are unheard of". [note: CGOB., pp. 197-199.]
In thus recording the memories of the
life she had known in her youth Charlotte
Grace O Brien was unconsciously performing
the function of social historian. And
not only in prose, but in verse too she set
down her recollections of her native
countryside, and of its people-many of
them still Irish-speaking-who were her
people:
True are these words for me-God knows
how true! - My
people, my own countrymen, my
friends;
For ever, as I trust, till this life ends,
My love, my life, my hopes are vowed to you.
When sorrow came, when grief or pain I
Knew,
With reverent love and tender watchful
care
My burden with me you have sought to
bear,
Hiding your tears lest mine should start anew.
I fancy-if God wills it-when I die
Your children, playing where the sunbeams
Pass,
May gather daisies near me as I lie,
While you, reclining on the pillowed grass,
May say, "She loved us, dwelling midst her
own;
God grant that we may meet around His
throne."
Charlotte's first book, the novel, Light and
Shade, which was published in the autumn
of 1878, deals with the Fenian Rising of
1867. The details relating to the Fenian
movement were given to her by William
Upton, a carpenter from nearby Ardagh,
who was in charge of the Fenians who
attacked Ardagh police barracks on the
night of 6 March, 1867.
Always eager to foster the instinct for
literary expression, she encouraged those
who wrote to show her their writings. The
already-mentioned William Upton was one
of those who profited by her encouragement,
for it was under Charlotte's guidance
that he published his novel, Uncle Pat's
Cabin, in the l880's. [note: ibid, p. 44.]
Significantly enough, one of the heroes
in Charlotte's Light and Shade is a young
landlord who has the interests of his tenants
at heart. Thinking, no doubt, of benevolent
landlords like her cousins the Spring Rices
and the de Veres, she wished to make it
clear that there were some good landlords
whom she admired equally with the Fenians.
There was much sadness in Charlotte's
life. In l877 her brother Charles, dearest
comrade of her childhood, died. In 1879 the
two daughters of her brother Edward went
to school in England, where their brother
Dermod was already at school. After their
going Charlotte felt herself bereft, and
largely thrown on her own resources.
Stephen Gwynn describes her as "this
mother who was no mother",[note: ibid,
p. 42] and tells
us that her literary accomplishments "never
atoned to her for the natural human duties
and happiness as wife and mother whose
lack left her life starved but not spoilt". [note: ibid, p. 3.]
In that year of l879, when her nieces left
home for school in England, she set down
her thoughts on her deafness in one of her
finest and most poignant poems:
The woods are silenced for me, and the streams
Ripple no more for me along the leas,.
No more for me the birds sing melodies
To greet the morn, or give the sun good
dreams;
No more the circling rooks in heavy crowds
Beat homeward cawing, 'neath the windswept
clouds.
Where are the sweet sounds gone? Are they
all gone?
Gone from the meadows deep with swathes
of hay:
There the blithe corncrake woke the
summer day,
Or startled the still air the whole night long.
Now silent in their beauty they bend low
While the rich-scented breezes o'er them
blow.
Oh! merry voices of the world of life,
From the warm farm, the byre, the henroost
shed;
There nesting swallows flashed above my
Head,
And all about the air with sound was rife;
With din of sparrow hordes, incessant, shrill,
Debating, scolding, loving-them so still.
So still, for I had called them! Breathlessly
I stood awaiting the oncoming burst
And rush of rival voices, all athirst
To fill the air with carols mad with glee - Set
with dark globes and crowns, the burnished
leaves
Now sway in silence 'neath the silent eaves.
O earth! what murmurs sweet beguile thy
Rest,
Ere yet the thrush his glorious matin rings;
Ere yet the goldfinch on his glittering wings
Brushes the jasmine stars from round his nest;
Ere yet the daisy leaves turned toward the sun,
Bid night 'Good night', and speak his day
begun.
Oh, bitter loss! all Nature's voices dumb.
Oh, loss beyond all loss! about my neck
The children cast their arms; no voices
break
Upon my ear; no sounds of laughter come - Child's
Laughter, wrought of love, and life,
and bliss;
Heedless I leave the rest, had I but this!
Reading that poem. by Charlotte on her
deafness will surely recall for many people
the great poem that Milton wrote on his
blindness. But Charlotte's is a more hum.an,
more personal poem. No loss she cites but a
real loss; every image is a concrete image.
In 1880 Edward O Brien married for the
second time. His wife, Julia Marshall,
owned a house in London, and this constituted
a new and remote centre for the
Cahermoyle household. Every year seemed
to pull apart farther the pattern of life
Charlotte had known. In a letter written to
her younger niece, Mary, shortly after the
second marriage of Edward, she remarked:
" ... you have everything before you and I
have only my dogs". [note: ibid, p. 43.] She was very fond
of dogs.
Charlotte now went to live in a house
she had had built for herself some years
earlier near Foynes. She herself had chosen
the site, which overlooked the great
spreading waters of the Shannon Estuary;
and she called the house Ard-an-Oir (the
Height of Gold, or the Golden Height),
after the golden furze blossoms that
crowned the height on which the house
stood. She describes the view from the
house in her novel, Light and Shade:
''Near us where the river runs westward
towards the sea lies a fair green island, which
on the sheltered side is fringed with trees
even to the water's edge. There the rowan
berries are ripe, and the beech leaves are
turning brown and gold, for autumn has
set in early this year. I must not linger over
these well-known, well-beloved scenes, but
I cannot forbear to speak of the charm that
above all comes back to the hearts of those
who know them well-the sense of an
unbounded space of earth and sky and
water. Look with me far over that great
plain. There one line of purest colour is lost
behind another, and on the very limits of
sight the Galtee mountains lie pale and grey.”
And again, in an essay called The River
Shannon, she tells:
"I went down by the river in the evening.
It was full, the tide just past the turn, and
sweeping down the great mass of water at
an extraordinary pace, and yet, though the
whole river was swinging along at many
miles an hour, the surface was a marvellous
mirror. The glowing masses of furze on the
island, a quarter mile away, were so near
and distinct in the wave one could almost
stretch out a hand to gather them. Every
cloud and every shade of light and colour
in the sky were again in the river, but far
more intense ... I stood, as the old books
used to say, 'entranced'. And still the river
swept down, and still the furze and the
wonderful green and the dark cloud bar
were, as it were, under my hand, and the
glorious 'gates of the Shannon', as the
Elizabetheans called this Foynes, were
opened to heaven's light beyond my
touch''.
A great lover of nature, and a knowledgeable
gardener, Charlotte set to work
enthusiastically on her garden, transforming
what was originally a bracken field into a
delightful place of shrubs and roses and
blooms.
Before 1880 she was not closely interested
in current politics. Her chief occupation of
those years-apart from her writings--is
revealed in a bundle of letters from Professor
George Rolleston of Oxford, Natural
Historian, Anthropologist and Biologist.
We are told that "she was taken up with
bones and stones, for she always tended to
dabble in scientific investigation". [note: ibid, p. 48.]
But the events of 1879 and 1880 turned
her thoughts to very different themes.
Conditions were very bad in Ireland, and it
was feared there would be a repetition of
the famine horrors of the l840's. The banner
of the Land League had just been raised by
Parnell and Davitt, and it was obvious that
Ireland was facing another period of great
trial and danger.
In December, 1880, an article headed The
Irish 'Poor Man', which Charlotte had
written, appeared in The Nineteenth Century.
It was a fairly long article, and it showed
clearly that Charlotte had given very much
thought to the agrarian and social problems
then besetting Ireland, and that she had
some original views as to how those
problems could best be resolved. At the
beginning of the article she referred to the
likelihood of the claim of the tenant farmers
being granted, and then she went on:
"In satisfying the present holders of the
land, a great act will be done, but not all.
There is yet another class to be dealt with,
and that the most dangerous-those who
class themselves as 'the poor man',-that is,
those who possess neither home nor birthright
in the land, the agricultural labourers,
the village artisans, and the men who work
in small towns at odd jobs of various
labours". . .
She then went on to describe the position
of the industrious young man who stayed
in Ireland as a labourer. He was perhaps paid
two shillings a day; in good times maybe
half a crown; but probably one and sixpence
a day, or even less, would represent his usual
earnings. "If he has a bit of land from the
farmer he pays twice as much for it as the
farmer pays, and has no security for it, or
for his house for which he pays from £ l to
£5 p.a. He is at the mercy of the farmer
who can turn him out." Tradesmen were
somewhat better off, but their wages were
terribly uncertain.
What then was the answer? she asked.
Was it emigration? But then, what about
the Nation? she queried. "There is such a
thing as natural selection in the human race
as in animals. Do you skim off the
industrious?"
Should they marry so young, at twenty-three
or so? Her answer to that was that
they'll be able to support their family when
they're young, and that their children will
support them when they are ageing. With
a large family, however, "they do not live,
they starve".
If the industrious emigrate, she said, the
feckless, the dregs remain; they marry at
nineteen; they send their wives and children
out to beg, and drink part of what they
collect. Therefore, even if the farmers are
ultimately satisfied, there still remains the
danger of an explosion to come; and it will
be a revolution of the most dangerous
elements-"it will be the rising of a class
that hates the class above it with an unspeakable
hatred."
"A revolution, not a political revolution,
but a social revolution, is what the Government
will have to deal with." The labourers,
she said, were suspicious of the farming class;
and, pin- pointing the conditions under
which the poorer classes in Ireland lived,
she told how "last year ... many a man in
Ireland lived for months on one or two
meals of Indian meal a day, or, worse still,
on turnips.'' Her proposal for the remedying
of this sad state of affairs was:
Let the Government take up compulsorily
from the present holders a reserve of land,
the amount being proportional to the
extent of farm or domain, taking no land
from the small farms, but from each twenty
or thirty acre farm reserving one acre . . .
Government should apportion one-acre lots
to the present labourers where good houses
exist. Where such houses did not exist
houses should be built.
As a postscript to her article she added
that since writing the article a Labour
League had spread silently through Limerick
and Cork, if not farther. She felt that as a
result there would be mutual help between
small farmers and labourers.
In March, l88l, The Nineteenth Century
published another article from Charlotte. It
was called Eighty Years, and was a devastating
review of Ireland's condition in the
eighty years since the passing of the Union.
The eighty years in question, she said, had
been a period of recurring famines, coercion
acts, landlordism and evictions; and "that
the legislation of Ireland had hitherto been
only won at the point of the sword was easy
to show" -Catholic Emancipation, commutation
of Tithes, Disestablishment of the
Church, Land Act of l870.
"It is folly to blink," she declared, "the
fact that the Irish people have taken to heart
O Connell's maxim, 'Ireland never yet
trusted but she was betrayed". "For myself",
she said, ''I have the strongest confidence not
only in the good intentions of Mr. Gladstone
and of Mr. Foster, but of the great mass of
the English public, but I look back into
history and see that men who as regards
their English career showed themselves
worthy of trust, yet failed in Irish affairs,
not because of a want of will, but because
they had to work against an impossibility,
namely, the setting to rights of a State other
than their own in which almost every part
was radically wrong."
Of the Irish people she said: "I think that
the instinct of the people is in the right, that
only as an independent nation can Ireland
make use of her great powers". But the
Irish to be well governed, she declared,
must have their nationality respected. She
stated the form of Home Rule she would
settle for.
"I would give universal suffrage to elect
local members for limited districts who
would form provincial assemblies, numbering
in members say one hundred for each
province . . . They should elect a council,
say twenty- five from each province, to
meet in Dublin. I would have all local
affairs managed by the province, all public
affairs managed by the council. I would
have at the head of the executive an Irishman
appointed by the Crown, permanent
and unconnected with English party. I
would give the whole power of the executive
and army into his hands. I would have
no official responsible to the English
Parliament."
As head of the executive she suggested
either Sir Charles Gavan Duffy, or Lord
Dufferin.
Though always strongly nationalist, and
in favour of the aims of the Land League,
she found herself in somewhat of a dilemma
in the campaign against landlordism, for she
felt that the Land League made no distinction
as between bad and good landlords. Because
of this, her approval of the League was a
qualified approval. Her attitude in this
matter was readily understandable, for she
numbered among her close friends the
Spring Rices and the de Veres, families of
the landlord class, who treated their tenants
with the utmost consideration, and who, in
return, were held in the highest regard by
the people. But any excesses committed by
the Land League supporters were, she felt,
"the natural inevitable outcome of the
sudden idea of delivery from a serfdom of
centuries". [note: ibid, p. 52.]
Writing to Lord Monteagle in January,
1881, she said: "How is it the Government
can't see that Parnell knows the country,
and can foresee for it, and is a man to be
consulted, not treated as an enemy? I
suppose they are afraid of an outcry if they
dared listen to the opinions of the man who
represents the people of Ireland as surely as
he does". [note: ibid, p. 52.]
In another letter, written in February,
1881, she speaks of "one of the things in
which the great good the League has done" :
"It has so raised men to consider interests
outside their own families ... injustice,
over-reaching, land grabbing, usury, and
ill-treatment of the poor are now condemned
by the awakened public spirit, headed by
priests and bishops. And to drive back
Ireland under these vices of slavery, the
Government are now about to use all their
power. I never will believe again in any
public man from England as regards Ireland,
never, be he Mr. Greatheart, or Gladstone,
or Bright, or anyone. They are good upright
men, and understand England, but
they do not understand Ireland". [note: ibid, pp . 53-54.]
With conditions daily worsening in
Ireland, the waves of emigration to America
swelled higher and higher. In 1879, forty-seven
thousand people (8.9 per 1,000) left
Ireland. In 1880 the number reached a
staggering ninety-five thousand (18 per
1,000). A more or less chance visit to Cobh - or
Queenstown, as it was then called-in
March, 1881, was almost immediately to
plunge Charlotte Grace O Brien into a
campaign that was to bring her name before
the public on both sides of the Atlantic.
Her reason for going to Cobh was to visit
her brother Charles's widow, who had
recently married a Mr. Dickson, an officer
in the Royal Irish Constabulary. In the
company of the Dicksons, and of a Captain
Wilson, a Board of Trade Inspector,
Charlotte went on board one of the ships
conveying the emigrants. For a considerable
length of time she had been interested in,
and not a little curious about, the conditions
under which the emigrants, particularly the
young girls, travelled. What she saw
appalled her.
The result was an article written by her,
and published in the Pall Mall Gazette on
6 May, 1881. The article had the effect of a
bursting bomb on the public and on the
shipping owners, as can well be imagined
from the following extracts :
"The great bay of Queenstown",
Charlotte wrote, "was flooded with light
and sunshine when we stepped on board the
tender which takes the emigrants to the
ship at the mouth of the harbour. I, coming
from one of the chief emigrating counties
of Ireland, had long wished to see for myself
under what conditions the voyage was
made, and also to observe the type shown
by the emigrants when the individuals were
unknown to me personally.
"The pier was crowded, mostly with
young men and women, a few of the latter
carrying young children. Each emigrant
must bring on board a mattress, tins and
plate. At first the bustle of departure, in a
few instances the farewells, the buying of
little pots of shamrock for the love of the
old land, and all the coming and going
consequent on the moving of baggage,
prevented my being able to judge of
individual faces. Once off, however, it
became possible to distinguish. Sorrow
brings out latent expression, and the
evidences of fresh sorrow were on almost
every face. Poverty was written in large
letters there-ignorance, weakness, too,
and indecision ....
"The deck of the ship seemed crowded,
but in fact only 400 were there, a third of
the full number the ship is supposed to
carry. Thus for the emigrants. Now for
their manner 'of life. I was shown the ship
by a Government official, and I state nothing
but what I myself saw. My seeing, which
might be deceptive, was confirmed to me
in all its worst particulars by this official,
whose duty especially connects him with
those emigrant ships.
"It is not necessary to say that wherever
the sacred foot of wealth trod there all was
gold and silver, shining brass, cleanliness,
comfort and decency. We had come on
board, however, to see the emigrants, and
the emigrants' quarters we were determined
to see. 'They are very bad; you would not
like to see them.' But we insisted. First,
then, we went down into a large dark hold.
This was the quarters of the single men. A
memory of the descriptions of slave ships
flashed across me; and below this place the
guide showed us a deep hole.
" 'I could not take you down, it is much
worse than what you see'. But my business
was with the women's quarters, and we
went there. Between two decks, better
lighted than the men's quarters, was a large
space, open from one side of the ship to the
other. From either side of a long central
walk to the outer walls of the ship were
slung two enormous hammocks, one suspended
about three feet from the floor, the
other above the lower one. . . . I suppose
each of these hammocks carry about one
hundred persons. They were made of sail
cloth, and being suspended all around from.
hooks, were perfectly flat. Narrow strips
of sail cloth divide this great bed into
berths. These strips of cloth, when the
mattresses were out, formed divisions about
eight inches high; when the mattresses were
in, it must be almost one level.
"Now in these beds lie hundreds of men
and women. Any man who comes with a
woman who is, or calls herself, his wife,
sleeps by right in the midst of hundreds of
young women who are compelled to live
in his presence day and night .... Do not
look on these abodes of misery now in the
daylight and open for inspection-they are
empty, swept and garnished; think that in
the darkness of the night, the ship pitching
in mid- ocean, a glimmering light or two
makes visible to you this mass of moaning
humanity . ... This is no brutal and impure
dream; this is the truth, the living horror
menacing the life, honour and soul of
hundreds of thousands of our fellow-countrymen.
The ship in which I saw these
things, being supposed to carry in this
manner 1,000 steerage passengers, carried
last year on one voyage 1,775 emigrants ... "
She asked that some action should be
taken to right the conditions on the emigrant
ships:
"That the ships of some of these lines are
not so abominable as that I saw is at least a
comfort; but these things should not depend
on the sense of right or money interests of
ship owners. Governments protect and
inspect property of various kinds. Should
they not above all protect defenceless
human beings, especially women and
children? Women have a right to ask that
the interests of women should be under the
protection of women. Men have too often
learned to condone and accustom themselves
to terrible evils."
Finally, she said she grieved to see the
American flag-"rightly dear to us Irish as
the unseen flag that waves only in the heart
of a faithful people"-floating over the
whited sepulchre such as that beautiful boat
was.
Immediately after the publication of the
Pall Mall Gazette article, Mr. Frank Hugh
O Donnell, M.P., raised the matter in the
British Parliament, and enquired if it was
"the intention of Her Majesty's Government
to take any steps to put an end to such a
disgraceful treatment of the emigrant
poor''.[note: Pall Mall Gazette,
7/5/1881.]
A Cecil B. Roche of Dublin had a letter
in the Gazette of 9 May, stating that the
conditions on a vessel he had inspected - the
Bothnia of the Cunard line-were not
similar to those complained of by Miss
O Brien. In the Gazette of 10 May, it was
reported that "Mr. Chamberlain gave
assurances of a determination to investigate
the charges made by Miss O Brien in her
letter to the Pall Mall Gazette, which was
evidently highly satisfactory to the Home
Rulers." Mr. Chamberlain was at that time
at the Board of Trade.
As a result of all this publicity, Captain
Wilson met Charlotte again, and inspected
some ten ships with her, and having completed
these inspections with Captain
Wilson Charlotte was satisfied that through
inaccurate observation she had gravely misstated
certain facts. Yet she insisted, and
rightly so, that fundamentally her protest
had been justified; that the arrangements
were unsuited to, and utterly lacking in,
proper protection for the crowds of young
women then streaming across the Atlantic
in the emigrant ships. Her second impression
of conditions on the ships, which she set out
in memorandum form, was published in
the Board of Trade's Blue Book.
The English newspapers now charged her
with recklessness in her original condemnation
published in the Pall Mall Gazette. As
she remarked herself, she now had a very
rough time of it for a period, but strong
friends, aware of what she was striving to
do, rallied to her support. One such was
Archbishop Croke of Cashel, who, on the
30 June, 1881, wrote to her, saying: "God
will, I am sure, give you a high place in
heaven for all the good you are striving to
do. I hope to be able to second your
efforts". [note: CGOB, p. 62.]
Though at that time herself a Protestant,
Charlotte suggested the establishment of an
order of Catholic Ocean Nuns to see after
the welfare of the young women who were
emigrating; and she also suggested that a
Catholic chaplain should travel on each
emigrant ship.
In Cobh she set up a lodging house to
provide accommodation for one hundred
and five persons, as she felt that prospective
emigrants awaiting the arrival of their ships
were being charged exorbitant prices for
lodgings. The keepers of the lodging houses,
who were having a bumper harvest, at the
cost of the emigrants, resented this new
competition, and made their feelings on the
matter evident to Charlotte in no uncertain
fashion.
It was a rough life, she tells us. She had
not even a bedroom, but slept in her sitting
room. She visited the ships day after day,
along with a medical officer, often
beginning at six o'clock in the morning,
and going through three or four ships in
the one day. The shipping lines were now
willing to co- operate with her.
But soon she realised that the place where
most good could be done was in New York,
where the ships disgorged their crowds of
immigrants. The White Star line took her
over free of cost in 1882. On arrival in New
York she took a room in a tenement house,
and remained there for a month, getting to
know the position with regard the immigrants
at first hand. Before leaving New
York she sought an interview with Bishop
Ireland. "I met an apostle" was her summing
up of him afterwards. Under the influence
of Bishop Ireland the care of the immigrants
when they landed in the United States was
taken over by the Church.
It was because she couldn't prevail on the
Church authorities in Ireland to provide a
somewhat similar service in Cobh that she
continued to keep open her lodging house
there. About three thousand people passed
through this lodging house yearly. The
personal contact she had with the emigrants
gave her a very strong influence over the
shipping lines, so much so that she soon
found herself in the position of being able
to force almost any reform she thought fit.
She went over eleven ships in May, 1881,
with the Board of Trade officer. After
January, 1882, she saw all the ships
constantly, and visited every nook and
corner of them. On a couple of occasions
she travelled as a steerage passenger from
Liverpool to Cobh to see and experience
conditions at first hand. On these occasions
she must surely have been thinking of her
friend and fellow-countryman, Stephen de
Vere, who had travelled steerage on the
emigrant ships to America in the Famine
period in order to discover what the
conditions were like in those years. Stephen
de Vere, like Charlotte Grace O Brien, had
been consumed with concern for the Irish
poor, which, in their time, meant the masses
of the Irish people.
The British Government decided to aid
emigration from Ireland by offering a grant
of £5 to each family willing to leave for
the United States. This policy drew a storm
of protest from the Irish residents in
America, as they considered assisted emigration
of this kind to be an official attempt by
the English to get the Irish out of Ireland,
thereby finally solving, to England's satisfaction,
the centuries-old "Irish problem."
Charlotte O Brien, in so far as she was
seeing after the welfare of those emigrating,
now found herself under a shadow of
suspicion, as some people chose to see in her
an agent of the British Government, aiding
and abetting in the carrying out of the
Government's scheme. Charlotte hotly
denied that she was, or ever had been, or
ever would be an agent of the British
Government in this matter. She stated
firmly and sincerely that she was "no
believer in the English idea that to improve
Ireland you should exile its people". [note: ibid, p. 78.]
But since tens of thousands of Irish people
would continue to emigrate, she proposed
that the strength of the Irish-American
population should be enlisted to come to the
aid of the immigrants when they arrived
in the States, and to see after their physical
and spiritual welfare. To further her proposal,
she travelled about 4,000 miles in the
States, lecturing and speaking to audiences.
Bishop Ireland continued to be a tower of
strength to her.
Back home in Ard-an-Oir at last, a new
world was beginning to open before her.
She had become interested in the Catholic
religion; and, finally, she decided to become
a Catholic. In a letter to one of her nieces
she told of some of the things that had
influenced her decision:
"Last year I was present at the death of a
little child, killed by a blast on the road here.
At her death all the village of Foynes knelt
and prayed through her last agony, the
priest being there only for a moment, as he
was only passing by on his way to Limerick.
It was a scene of such truly Christian
worship as brought me face to face with the
desire to enquire ... ". [note: ibid, p. 102.]
Aubrey de Vere, she told her niece, gave
her some books to read, not controversial
ones, but devotional ones.
''Since then I have read everything I could
lay my hands on, on both sides, and I am
satisfied that, to me at least, if revelation is
true, Truth lies with the Catholics. Catholic
worship in their churches is so intense, so
devotional-it makes the spiritual exercises
of Protestant congregations seem hardly
worship at all ... ".[note: ibid, p . 102.]
So Charlotte Grace O Brien became a
Catholic.
Charlotte was a woman of many and
varied interests. She was, for instance, a very
keen botanist, and she and her brother,
Robert Donaugh O Brien, contributed
plant records from County Limerick to
Robert Lloyd Praeger in his notable work
on plant distribution in Ireland. He recorded
the Limerick plants in the Irish Naturalist in
1903. They included such plants as Goat's
Beard, Millet Grass, Bird's Nest Orchid,
Bee Orchid, Lesser Broomrape, Lady's
Mantle, Great Hedge Bedstraw, and they
were collected in Cahermoyle, Ard-an-Oir,
Foynes, Ringmoylan, Castleconnell bog,
Loughill, Mullagh, Mount Trenchard, and
other areas. Donaugh O Brien was the first
person to discover Scirpus triqueter (Triangular
Scirpus) in Ireland; he discovered it in
the area of the Shannon estuary, the only
locality in Ireland where it is found.
Charlotte O Brien engaged in a survey of
the flora of north-west County Limerick
with her friend of the Science and Art
Museum, Miss Matilda Knowles, the
distinguished lichenologist. The area concerned
comprises one hundred and forty-five
square miles of limestone, shale and
coal measures. Charlotte and Miss Knowles
recorded many plants of interest-Yellow
Meadow Rue, Welsh Poppy, Scurvy
Grass, Sweet Violet, Dwarf Furze, Zigzag
Clover, Wild Cherry, Bur Marigold,
Verbena, Black Horehound, Irish Spurge,
Moonwort, many species of rose, blackberries,
sedges, grasses and ferns. As a result
of this survey sixty species were added to
the flora of County Limerick, a notable
achievement.
Full details of the survey were published
in an article entitled The Flora of the Barony
of Shanid, which appeared in The Irish
Naturalist in 1907. Charlotte also wrote
Wild Flowers of the Undercliffe, dealing with
an area of botanic interest in the Isle of
Wight. The publication was illustrated by
a Miss C. Parkinson, and was published in
1881.
Her literary work, which included the
novel, Light and Shade, and two books of
verse (Lyrics, and Cahermoyle, or the Old
Home) brought Charlotte a certain amount
of disappointment, in that they failed to
achieve any great success in Ireland. This
lack of success may have been due to a
certain lack of discipline in her writing, for
one is inclined to agree with her brother
Edward's criticism, that her work lacked
finish and form, despite its many merits.
Hoping that perhaps her books would sell
in America, she wrote to John Boyle
O Reilly, the Fenian leader, seeking his
advice. O Reilly's reply was:
"We Irish in America are a great power
for works and politics, etc., but we do not
buy books. My books are sold, but not to
my own people". [note: ibid, p. 101.]
After the Parnell split, and the disillusion
and disappointment that followed it,
Charlotte withdrew from politics, and
devoted her energies to the Gaelic League,
and to the promotion of Irish industry and
of co-operation. She began enthusiastically
to study the Irish language-there were still
many native speakers in west Limerick.
Douglas Hyde-An Craoibhín Aoibhinn - was
one of her closest friends, and she
proposed to bring out with him a bilingual
book of traditional riddles, which she herself
was to have illustrated.
She spoke one day at a Gaelic League
aeríocht in Abbeyfeale. When she stood up
to address the crowd-estimated at 5,000 - she
got a tremendous reception. When, at
last, the cheers had died away, she began to
speak.
"I see caps, a whole sea of caps", said she.
"How many of those caps are Irish made?"
Then she put her hand to her own straw
hat. "This is an Irish-made hat I have on me.
How many of you have on Irish-made
coats? This (touching her big mantle) is a
Galway cloak I have on me. How many
Irish-made boots are there in that fine
crowd?" Then, sticking out her leg, and
holding on to Father Casey (parish priest of
Abbeyfeale, and famous Land League
priest) to steady herself, she said: "And
these are Irish boots and stockings I have
on me." She was cheered to the echo.[note: ibid, p. 125.]
Charlotte wrote a number of very readable
essays, the most striking of which was
one called The Feminine Animal, in which she
traces the evolution of woman, and dwells
upon the nobility of woman's calling in
motherhood. It is a remarkable essay for
the time in which it was written.
In 1909 she contributed six articles to
Irish Gardening. She began the February
article by saying: "We read on every hand
nowadays of the bountiful blessings of
youth, the freedom and the joy of move-
111ent and of love, the excitement of travel
and the pleasures of physical perfection
when one is young. Is there no one to be
found who will sing of the virtue of old
age?"
She spoke of her "chips of rock" making
a fine nest for trees; "and as I walk about
and show newcomers my thujas, or piceas,
or pines, and say to them, 'There was not a
tree in this place when I took it up, but look
at that tree, and that, and see what an old
woman I must be,' I glory in my age."
Writing in the May issue about the
pictures of James Hurley, a travelling
photographer of 14 Staines St., Dublin,
whose photographs were used to illustrate
her articles in Irish Gardening, she had this:
"For, indeed, the right use of photography
is to interpret the intricacies of
vegetation, or of the human countenance,
or animal life. So I was thinking as I lay in
the sun under my pinus looking far out over
the island, beyond to the Beeves Lighthouse,
and away and away, and my heart sank at
the thought of ever attempting to speak of
our river, of our ever varying, ever wonderful
Shannon, which lay before my eyes, it
and its country spread wide in its sweeping
magnificence of tender, frost-bright
colour."
In the June issue she told how she had
taken to growing from seed, and expected
to have "briar roses all over the whole place
from the best of seeds", in the middle of
thorn and honey-suckle and furze . . . "I
will puzzle the botanists of another generation, and when my bones are dust and my
good spade rust, when my house is pulled
down, and my garden asphalt and bricks,
my extra special wild briars and my daffodils
will still linger on the hillside and scent the
bloomy air for generations that knew me
not, nor mine."
That was the last article Charlotte Grace
O Brien wrote for Irish Gardening, or for
any other publication, for she died
unexpectedly on 4 June, 1909. An editorial
tribute in the July issue of Irish Gardening said:
"Miss Charlotte Grace O Brien, whose
contributions to Irish Gardening have given
delight to so many readers, died on the
4th of June. The news came to us from
Ardanóir on the morrow of her death, and
filled us with a consternation and a sorrow
that cannot be expressed in words. It was
so shockingly unexpected. We had been in
communication with her early in the month
over the last article of her series, 'The
Making of Our Home', which was to
appear in the present number. She was not
feeling well, and asked for the latest date
possible for sending in the MS., which,
alas! was never written. Miss Charlotte
O Brien was a great and warm- hearted
Irishwoman, whose memory will be
cherished by many, and lovingly so by
those of us who chanced to fall within the
indescribable charm of her wonderful
personality ... ".
In that same July issue of Irish Gardening
Professor W. F. P. Stockley paid his tribute
to the great Irishwoman who was gone. He
spoke of ''her wise cheerfulness and practical
acceptance of things", recalling how "the
priest- friend who spoke at the Mass while
her body lay near the altar told his hearers
how his thoughts had often been, when
ministering to her, that a priest could well
long to have that simple, whole-souled
faith ... ". "In earlier days", said Professor
Stockley, "she had been much attracted by
Caroline Fox and such friends; as, later, all
were embraced in mystical Catholicity ...
"And I remember seeing Miss O Brien
herself, a horrible emigrant figure, lugging
a huge, hideous carpet bag into a Dublin
tram, spurning alarmed attentions. She was
just off for the Cove of Cork, in the days
when she would prove in her own person
whether more tickets were given to the
emigrants than there were places in ships ...
"Herself an Irish nationalist, by loyalty
to her father, Smith O Brien, by instinct,
shall one say, and by conviction, there never
was a better follower of the best of her
father's friends, Thomas Davis, and all of
his teaching to accept every man's work for
Ireland; never to question, nor to suspect;
to be ready to forward every honest effort,
to meet honesty fairly, to be ready, again
and again, to believe in others. That is shown
in her story of Fenian times, Light and
Shade.
" 'I can do nothing for our Irish', · he
(Smith O Brien) once wrote, 'until they
stop their senseless feuds'. His daughter,
Gaelic Leaguer, industry helper and peaceful
politician, practised what he preached ... ".
Finally, let us hear what her friend and
kinswoman, Catherine Spring Rice, had to
say of her:
"Few women", she wrote, "have the
intense delight she took in all that belongs
to open- air life, coupled with her keen
interest in the world of letters. Natural
history, poetry, books of all kinds - religious,
scientific, historical - everything
came as grist to her mill, and filled up the
hours when stress of weather (it had to be
pretty bad before it was taken any notice of)
or absolute darkness kept her indoors. Then
with returning light and sunshine she would
be 'off out'; the mere phrase suggests her,
and brings back the recollection of her long
walks over hill and dale, straight across the
wide grass country round Cahermoyle; her
botanising expeditions, her adventurous
climbs on the rocks at Kilkee, her daring
swims in the Atlantic and the swift-flowing
Shannon ....
"She had a most ardent, impulsive, and,
at the same time, a happy nature, full of
enthusiasm for what she felt to be great and
good in thought and deed in the past, and
for the living men and women with whom
she came in contact ... ".
Charlotte Grace O Brien was buried in
"the high windy graveyard of Knockpatrick"
, from where Saint Patrick had
blessed Kerry, saying " Beannaím uaim siar",
and from where one can look down on
Foynes, and Ard-an-Oir, and the lordly
Shannon. It was the spot she wanted for
lathair a haiséirí- for her place of resurrection.
In 1890 she had written :
"That's the place for me ; grand. The
wind was sweeping up from the Atlantic,
the sky was heavy with broken clouds, the
mid air bearing uncertain drifts of rain, the
river grim and wild, the Fergus desolate and
grey, the bogland black, and a big heap of
human bones at my feet. My! how weird
it looked. The grandest place in this world
to my individuality; may my grave be
there, and no other earth hold my bones."
And there she now sleeps, in that place
Of her own choice, Charlotte Grace O Brien,
a great Irishwoman, who, in her own
honourable life, did honour to her sex, her
race, and her name.
SOURCES
The main source of information for this article was the work, Charlotte Grace O Brien, Selections from her Writings and Correspondence, With a Memoir by Stephen Gwynn, (abbreviated to CGOB in the source list below), published by Maunsell&Co.,
Ltd., Dublin, in 1909. Other sources not mentioned below are acknowledged in the body of the article.

