S. R. Lysaght was a poet and a novelist.
His literary output was comparatively small,
a mere nine books in the forty-three years
between 1893 and 1936. Although his
poetry enjoyed a succes d'estime he was best
(l. to r.) Doctor James Roche, Bishop of
Cloyne, Father Kent, P.P., Doneraile with
S. R. Lysaght, on the occasion of his grandson,
Fergus Patrick Mac Lysaght' s twenty-first
birthday, May 1938
known for his four novels, especially the
last two, Her Majesty's Rebels and My
Tower in Desmond, but the interval between
the publication of these in 1907 and 1925,
even though the former did also come out
in a cheap edition in 1914, was so long that
he naturally tended to be forgotten. The
scene of the first two, The Marplot (which
appeared in the customary three volumes
in 1893) and One of the Grenvilles (1899) was
only partially placed in Ireland and in them
you feel that the author is an exile, albeit
in touch and in love with his native
country; the last two are quite evidently the
work of a man reared and then living in the
country: both are mainly based on the
impact on his characters of the politics of
their period-Parnell and 1916-but nevertheless
they are not to be classed as political
novels since their absorbing interest lies in
the author's pleasant description of life in
Ireland and in the problems and relationships
of the very real people he portrays.
The opinion of a man who did not know
him personally would perhaps be more
fitting than that of his son. The following is
taken from the appreciation written by
James P. O'Reilly and published in The
Irish Times (20 September, 1941) after S. R.
Lysaght' s death. He agrees with what I have
said above about the two novels and goes
on: "Lysaght stood aloof from 'the movement'
and from party politics, but he
seems to me to have appreciated better than
any man of his position and upbringing the
working of the mind and heart of Irish
nationalism. The argument and feeling of
landowner and tenant in Land War times,
of the Irish soldier in British uniform in
South Africa, and of the pro-Boer Irishman,
of the Unionist, of the constitutional
Nationalist and of the fighting Sinn Feiner
of 1916 and onwards, are in these books
splendidly described. They are leisured,
well-written, most moving books, which
can be read and re-read with pleasure. They
are friendly and companionable. He himself
was doubtful of their claims as 'novels'.
There can be no doubt as to their value as
expositions of the social life and thought of
the author's lifetime". [note: Another appreciative notice which appeared some twenty years later (The Sunday Press, 24 July, 1963) was written by
Stephen Rynne. His assessment is essentially the same as O'Reilly's, but he approached his subject in a personal way as he
knew S. R. well, having spent a year with us in County Clare and County Cork as a "farm pupil", though I daresay he
could have taught us as much as we taught him about farming.]
He began to write another novel but had
not got very far with it when he died. The
script of this is in the Manuscript Department
of the National Library. (MS 5612).
To some extent the central figure in My
Tower in Desmond, Nick Quin, is autobiographical.
This leads me to consider what
sort of a man S. R. was. He was known by
everyone locally as "S. R." He was given
the Christian name of Sidney, which was
quite out of line with family tradition,
William, Patrick and Edward being the
usual names. He often said he would like to
use the Irish equivalent of Sidney, Seadna,
but this was no more than a pious wish. He
knew very little Irish but he encouraged us
in our plans for bringing up his eldest
grandson as an Irish speaker-that boy is
over fifty now and he and I have never
spoken a word of English to each other
unless there was another person with us who
did not speak the language-and my mother
had enough to keep up a conversation with
the child. Before I come to my attempt to
describe S. R. himself I may, perhaps, here
allude to his attitude to my action, in
company with ten other families of
Lysaght, in resuming the prefix, Mac
discarded, like so many other O's and Mac's,
in the period of Gaelic submergence. Here,
too, he approved but felt that he had made
his name as Lysaght and so it should remain.
My mother, however, did use the Mac on
suitable occasions.
Born in 1856, S. R.'s outlook was
necessarily Victorian, or perhaps I should
say, Edwardian: he was close on sixty when
Edward VII died. Nevertheless, he did to
some extent move with the times and was
able to understand the point of view of
people whose nationalism was more intense
than his own. He was a Redmondite in
politics, but I remember one occasion when
he sent a cheque for fifty pounds to Mr.
de Valera with a letter saying that he did not
agree with much of Dev's policy but understood
his son's connection with Sinn Fein,
which was his reason for the cheque. Even
as late as 1920 he was much away from
home. That year he spent some months in
Australia and so experienced few of the
twenty-six raids made by Crown forces on
our place in Co. Clare where we were
living. The very day he returned my mother
was standing trial by court-martial in
Limerick - we were under martial law. She
had a fine record in the struggle against the
Auxiliaries and Black and Tans, but her
offence on the occasion of her arrest was a
minor one, namely, being in possession of
two copies of The Bulletin. She was
sentenced to a month in jail or, alternatively
a fine of twenty-five pounds. Before we
could stop him, S. R. paid the fine. Though
we often had friendly arguments, that is
almost the only occasion on which I gave
out to him; but it must be remembered that
he was out of touch and did not realize that
according to the outlook of the time such a
fine should not have been paid. To my
remonstrance he replied: "Do you think I
could let her go off to jail for a month and
I without sight of her since last
spring."
Family history can be boring to people
not closely concerned, but to understand
S. R. as a man it seems proper to sketch
briefly his background. He belonged to a
family originally of County Clare, where
the Irish name MacGiolla Iasachta was first
anglicized Macgillysaghty, then MacLysaght
and later Lysaght. In the sixteenth century
our ancestor moved to County Limerick
but the family being Papist suffered transplantation
back to County Clare under the
Cromwellian regime; the adventures which
finally led his branch to become established
in County Cork are told in a small book of
mine entitled Short Study of a Transplanted
Family (1935). There they got through the
Penal Law period without losing the faith,
but a mixed marriage resulted in their being
Protestants in the nineteenth century. I will
have something to say about S. R. and
religion when I am. considering him as a
poet. His father was Thomas, a second son,
who practised as an architect in Cork. The
eldest son, William, S. R.'s uncle, who was
the owner of a large farm in the parish of
Doneraile, had no child to succeed him. so
S. R. spent n1.ost of the first twenty years of
his life with the expectation of becoming in
due course its owner; but old William
married a second wife and had an heir by
her so S. R. had to seek his fortune abroad
and spent much time in Australia and
England. During his years abroad he was
always very consciously an Irishman and
his aim was to return to Ireland as soon as
he could afford to do so. In what I may call
his late exile years we went to Ireland
regularly on holidays and he made sure that
when I did not accompany him on a
journey abroad I spent my time with
friends or relations in County Limerick or
County Cork.
Soon after the turn of the century he
found himself in a position to return
permanently to Ireland and he bought
Raheen, our present home in County Clare,
which is not far from where the family
lived before migrating to County Cork.
Some ten years later, old William died;
his eldest son was by then an American
citizen having no desire to return to Ireland
and S. R., by a family arrangement, got
possession of Hazelwood, the place where
he was reared and where his heart was. I
should mention that they were never landlords
but what were called "gentlemen
farmers" and as such ranked as "minor
gentry".
Notwithstanding the close assoc1atlon
with County Clare, S. R. always regarded
himself as a Corkman, or, more particularly,
a Doneraile man. He was a friend of Canon
P.A. Sheehan, who was parish priest there,
so much so that when he died in 1913 his
brother presented S. R. with a manuscript
common place-book compiled by the canon,
remarking that no one had a better right to
it than S. R. That book is in this room as I
write.
So much for his background. What of the
man himself? To me, he was more like an
elder brother than a parent, or perhaps if I
say he was my friend, I would better indicate
our relationship. But that is an aside: I
was about to describe him. One might
almost say he was two people. The one best
known to his friends and neighbours was
an old-style country gentleman in cap and
Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers, fond of
a day's rough shooting, or overseeing the
building of walls and outhouses (he often
said he "must have been bitten by a mad
mason"), keen on golf, too, (he was, in my
young days, captain of Lahinch Golf Club).
That, however, is a somewhat one-sided
picture as it ignores the practical patriotism
of the man. I remember one day, more than
sixty years ago, he said to me, referring to
the village of Tuamgraney at our gate:
"This must be one of the most depressed
and poverty-stricken places in Ireland; let's
do something to give at least one place west
of the Shannon a better life." Within a year
or so he had established the nursery industry
at Raheen (which is now one of the largest
concerns of the kind in the country)
extensive afforestation was, in due course,
undertaken in east Clare and, timber being
the requisite raw material, the selection of
our parish as the site of the large chipboard
factory was the final stage in this development.
Today our area is little troubled by
problems of unemployment or emigration.
It cannot be said that S. R. foresaw all this
expansion, but, in fact, it did result from his
action in those far-off days before the first
world war.
He had a keen sense of humour and
many's the time I heard him nuke a witty
remark which put him in the Jim.
Montgomery class. I may give just one
example of this. When we were on board
ship one time an Australian passenger said
to him: "Mr. Lysaght, can you see any
difference between an Austrylian lydy and
an English lydy ?" "I do", he replied
without hesitation, "an Australian lady is
more inclined to call a spade a spyde." She
was delighted by this seeming praise for the
forthrightness of her fellow-countrywomen
but the point was not missed by those of us
around who do not pronounce a as y.
The business in which he was employed
involved his spending a great deal of his
time travelling to many parts of the world,
but I think the frequent reference to the sea
in his poems and essays can be traced not to
his many journeys by steamer in his adult
life but to one long voyage he took as a
young schoolboy in a sailing ship when his
father went to South Africa on some
temporary architectural assignment. It is
this sea imagery which I find most emotive
in his poetry: storm, calm and the unknown
distant shore-his first book of poems is
called Poems of the Unknown Way. Here we
find the second S. R. that I referred to when
introducing him as a country gentleman. I
cannot do better than quote James P.
O'Reilly again: "He had travelled far in his
long life, not only in the countries of the
world, but also in the countries of the n1ind.
Before I read, as I did a few days ago, that
he was known to his friend, George
Meredith, the novelist, and that circle, fifty
years ago and more, as 'The Pilgrim', I
had thought that his life more fittingly than
most lives could be called a pilgrimage. He
had a quest, an unknown port, an undiscovered
shore, towards which he was forever
sailing. This theme runs through all
his poetry, through his essays, and through
the strange poetic drama on The Wandering
Jew, which was the product of his old age.
He had a questing, enquiring spirit, seeing
beauty in everything and everybody on the
road, but weighing and balancing all, and
finding no certainty in anything." Further
on, O'Reilly says: "His later work consists
of essays on the problems of human and
spiritual destiny, and is, like the poetry of
his earlier years, full of questionings and
doubts and gentle surmises .... In 1931, he
published The Immortal Jew, a lengthy play
in prose and verse on the legend of the
Wandering Jew. His Jew dies and is reborn
through the centuries. At each crisis in each
life he chooses Self and is punished by being
shown again the continuity of his betrayals
through the years."
S. R. regarded this in his magnum opus.
All his poems, however, were not so
introspective. Though the sonnet he called
The Penalty of Love has appeared in anthologies,
I like it so well that I make no apology
for quoting it:
If Love should count you worthy, and should
deign
One day to seek your door and be your guest
Pause! ere you draw the bolt and bid him rest,
If in your old content you would remain.
For not alone he enters, in his train,
Are angels of the mists, the lonely quest,
Dreams of the unfulfilled and unpossessed,
And sorrow, and Life's immemorial pain.
He wakes desires you never may forget,
He shows you stars you never saw before.
He makes you share with him for evermore
The burden of the world's divine regret.
How wise were you to open not-and yet
How poor if you should turn him from the
door.
In his appreciation, James O'Reilly
mentions another of the outstanding literary
figures of the nineties who influenced S. R.,
namely Robert Louis Stevenson. S. R.
described his week-long visit to Stevenson
in Samoa in his interesting contribution to
the book edited by Rosaline Masson
entitled I Remember Robert Louis Stevenson
(Edinburgh, 1922).
I have largely relied on O'Reilly to give
an impression of what I have called the
second S. R. as I feel somewhat out of my
depth in metaphysical speculation. As his
poems show, he was always wondering
about the meaning of life and the universe
and probing into what he meant by God
and for most of his life he did not find it
possible to belong to any denominational
church.
We did sometimes talk about religion in
the sense in which the word is ordinarily
used. Looking at the question from a
worldly standpoint, his attitude was pro-Catholic.
I remember when I was about
fourteen years old we were talking together
one night and he reminded me of the
traditional Catholic background of our
family and how it had only become
Protestant for a couple of generations after
the Penal Laws had expired, as I have outlined
earlier in this article. "So," he said,
"you can be a Catholic or a Protestant,
whichever you wish: I rather hope you will
be a Papist like our ancestors." I had no
hesitation in accepting his and my mother's
advice. The concluding sentence of
O'Reilly's article thus happily tells of
S. R.' s final solution to his own difficulties:
"Lysaght died in the faith of his ancestors
with the rites of the Catholic Church".
O'Reilly concludes with Stephenson's
well known couplet :
"Home is the sailor, home from the sea,
And the hunter home from the hill."
Finally, let me recall one aspect of S. R.
which I have not mentioned-his love of
Irish music. If I were asked what is the most
vivid recollection I have of him it would be
of him sitting at the piano playing Irish airs:
my earliest childhood memory of him is
just that and my last before his final
departure is the same. I can hear him playing
my favourite Cailin deas cruidte na mbó and
then the whole family of us singing Cockles
and Mussels as if it were yesterday, not
thirty-odd years ago, that silence fell on
that cherished custom.


Bibliography
MARPLOT (1st ed., 3 vols . , March , 1893: London and N.Y., Macmillan. Same publisher issued it in a one- vol. edition in
July, 1893, marked as Second Edition.
ONE OF THE GRENVILLES, lst ed., Feb., 1899. Reprinted April, 1899. (London and N.Y., Macmillan).
HER MAJESTY'S REBELS. lst ed., Feb., 1907. Reprinted Feb., 1907, March, 1907. London and N.Y., Macmillan. Cheap
edition, 1914.
HORIZONS AND LANDMARKS. 191L (London, Macmillan).
MY TOWER IN DESMOND. 1925. (London, Macmillan).
THE IMMORTAL JEW. A DRAMA. l93r. (London, Macmillan).
A READING OF POETRY. AN ESSAY. 1934. (London, Macmillan).
AUTHOR'S NoTE:-This essay is part of a forthcoming book to be called A Reading of L!fe.
A READING OF LIFE. 1936. (London, Macmillan.)
POEMS. (A collection of the poems published in HORIZONS AND LANDMARKS (19n) and POEMS OF THE
UNKNOWN WAY (1901) .] (London, Macmillan, 1928).

