I N October, 1831, Edward Stanley, the
Irish Chief Secretary, wrote to the Lord
Lieutenant, the Duke of Leinster, to
invite him to accept the Presidency of the
Board of National Education in Ireland. [note: Report of the Commissioners in Ireland, 1834-1841 incl. Dublin, 1842, pp. vii-xiii.]
The letter contained the guidelines to
what was to become known as the
"national" school system-one of the first
government supported popular education
systems in the English speaking world.
The structure of the system and its
operational organisation were not resultant
upon innovatory plans of Stanley's-more
properly they can be described as having
evolved from the failures and the success in
arrangements which had been made for
education institutions over a period of
years.
Of the utmost importance to the working
of the new arrangements, Stanley told the
Duke, was the constitution of the Board
which would superintend the system. No
suspicion of religious proselytism could be
attached to its activities, so, that, while
children of all religious denominations
would be admitted to the schools, no
interference in terms of curricular emphases,
awards, time-tabling or behavioural responses
could be made by the Board, its
management scheme, its teachers or texts.
Thus, the Board would of necessity, have
to be composed of persons of high personal
character and of exalted position in the
Church . . . in part of persons professing
different religious opinions" [note: Ibid.] who would
establish under their auspices an inspectorial
scheme; a model school and teacher training
centre; a book publishing and text distribution
system. The management of each
school would be in the hands of the Board
and they would look, for reasons of
religious equality, with most favour on
applications for aid from, firstly, combined
Protestant parochial clergys' requests;
secondly, from one clergyman and a
number of parishioners of the opposite
creed; thirdly, from parishioners of two
denominations. Schools would be kept open
each week for four or five days for moral
and literary education only, the remaining
one or two days would be set aside for
giving separate religious instruction. Stanley
pointed out that the government of 1812,
acting on the final recommendations of the
Commissioners of Education of the same
year, had imagined that a supervisory body,
greatly akin to the one which he had outlined,
was in the initial stages of operation.
This was the Central Committee of the
Society for Promoting the Education of the
Poor in Ireland, or the Kildare Place
Society. The earlier government had
increased its grant to the Society, but by
l83l, both a Cabinet majority and Stanley
asserted that the Society had, in some
practical instances, not lived up to its
original promise of non-denominational
Christian education, and could, therefore,
not be entrusted with management of the
new plan.
Whereas the question of denominational
control was the most important issue
surrounding the establishment of education
institutions at any level in Ireland in the
nineteenth century, concentration upon this
issue has tended to obscure other aspects of
their organisational arrangements which
have, in many respects, permeated those
which survived. In the case of the Kildare
Place Society, the Board of the National
Commissioners of Education accepted as
operational bases, its teacher training, text
book distribution and inspectorial systems.
As combined and operated by the Society
from l8ll, these were innovatory arrangements.
Who had instituted the systems and
how had this been done? The broad answers
to these questions can be found in the
history of the problem of education for the
poor in Ireland and Britain, more specifically
however, they appear to lie within the area
of the concern of some members of the
Religious Society of Friends, or Quakers,
with philanthropic educational endeavours.
The Quakers, Joseph Lancaster and William
Allen in London, and members of the
Bewley family, especially Samuel Bewley,
in Ireland, played major roles in the
establishment of the model school and
teacher training scheme, the establishment
of the text book depository and inspectorial
system, under the auspices of the Kildare
Place Society. It can be proposed that their
concern for popular education, while
closely related to their immediate situation,
had roots in the arrangements made by
members of the Society for schooling in
Ireland from the seventeenth century
onwards, as well as in early nineteenth
century changes in the ethic of Quakerism.
In order that this proposal can be presented,
some examination must be undertaken of
the pattern of the development of the
Society of Friends in Ireland from the time
of its foundation; attempts at the establishment
of schools by extraneous bodies
within that time; and finally of the correspondance
of Lancaster, Allen and Bewley
in the first year of the Kildare Place Society's
operation.
The distinctive idea of Quakerism, or
more accurately that which inspired the
Society's founder, George Fox, and his
companions in the l640's, was that the
Divine True Light enlightened every
human being. At a time when all men in
England were excited about religion, its
form, rite, and the mode of government of
its sects, this was a radical idea. It separated,
Fox contended, men from "all priests and
professors" [note: Thomas Hancock, The Peculium, London, 1907, p. 47.] and called on them to attend
only to "Christ who had the key" . [note: Ibid.] Thus
witness was borne against existing Churches
basically because these institutions could
and did bring about forgetfulness of the
presence of God. Hierarchies, set prayers,
the sanctification of buildings were
anathematized. In the early days, the first
characteristic of a member of the Society,
would have been "Enthusiast" -an oddly
clad man whose profession was to travel
about opposing existing religious practises,
witnessing to the new sometimes by the
most extravagant methods. At the same
time he could be described as 'philanthropist':_a lover of men. From the end of the
eighteenth century, philanthropist, as the
most necessary characteristic of Quakerism
is acknowledged. The movement to a
situation which accentuated this as primary
can be briefly explored. The seventeenth
century helped Quakerism. It met with
preparation and welcome. It also met with
bitter persecution, but resistance gave the
movement vigour. At the same time, with
growth, the early idea of a non-systematic
society began to become eroded, and rules
of discipline were compounded. This, while
giving some vigour and a binding force to
the Society, appeared in the eighteenth
century to conserve it. Quakerism began
to be seen more as a denomination than a
movement. Its members ceased to suffer,
its missionary zeal was calmed, Quietism as
an individual characteristic became more
apparent. Members of the Society who
travelled on itinerant ministeries during
that century can be seen most clearly as
builders and preservers of Quakerism, not
as convincers of others. In this, most
importantly, Quakers became recognised as
the most retiring and unproselytizing of
sects. Because of the rules forbidding oath
taking, public office, in most cases, was
closed to them, but when their energies
were turned to outlets open to them they
became rich. If the ideal virtue of the
eighteenth century middle classes can be
called "Public Spirit", members of the
Society, in Ireland, exhibited this spirit
outside corporate and governmental office. [note: There were exceptions, but these were remarkable.]
Quaker riches were used outside the
confines of the Society and philanthropy
was acknowledged as a characteristic. It
would be a distortion to suggest that this
benevolence was merely one of social
responsiveness-it sprang also from a deeply
religious basis. Bishop Wescott, in 1887,
wrote: "No religious order can point to
services rendered to humanity more unsullied
by selfishness or nobler in far-seeing
wisdom''.[note: Hancock, p. 152; Westcott, Social Aspects of Christianity, London, 1887, p. 130.]
The history of Quakerism in Ireland and
the concern of members of the Society with
education, broadly follows a pattern which
can be matched with the shifting emphases
within the religion as a whole. The first
members of the Society arrived as settlers
in the outcome of the Cromwellian
Settlement between 1650 and 1680. [note: Isabel Grubb, Quakers in Ireland, London, 1927, p. 16.]
Initially, they formed small scattered communities
in all the provinces with the
exception of Connaught. Within the first
thirty years, Quakers were as subject
to the vagaries in religious toleration
as were the Irish Catholics. The Restoration
brought confusion not only in terms of
Catholic toleration, but also in terms of the
position of Dissenters including Quakers,
who were all systematically subjected to
demands for tithes for the upkeep of the
Established Church. The refusal and
inabilities of both groups to do so, and
consequent imprisonments, did not, however,
bring about any kind of cohesion
between them. The early Quakers
consistently preached against Popery, and
their methods, according to MacLysaght,
"not unnaturally influenced popular feeling
against them". [note: Edward Mac Lysaght, Irish Life in the Seventeenth Century, Talbot Press, 1939, p. 300.]
They suffered rough treatment
from officialdom, were often in the
stocks, and on at least one occasion were
imprisoned as a result of interrupting a
Mass during a short period of official
Catholic toleration in 1669. It is not
surprising then, to find no reference to the
establishment of schools during the first
twenty-five years of the Society's ministry
in Ireland. The first recorded evidence of
measures taken to set up schools is contained
in the minutes of the National Half Yearly
Meeting of September, 1675. The minute
on education reads:
It is proposed the necessity of
endeavouring to get an able Friend to
teach youth and keep a school in this
nation for the better educating children;
it was thought next that every Provincial
general meeting do make inquiry how
many Friends' children may be had to
put forth to such a school and bring an
account to the next Half Year's Meeting,
and in the interim Francis Rogers and
Thomas Holme are desired to write in
to England to make inquiry for such a
Friend for keeping school at Castledermot
or near thereabouts. [note: Education Portfolio, Historical Collection, Religious Society of Friends, Eustace St., Dublin. It included Skilden Bell,
unpublished MSS, Notes on Friends Education in Ireland, Jan. 1919.]
Some aspects of the proposal demand
elaboration. Firstly in terms of the older
tenets of the Society, the notion of an
exclusive school for children seems a
contradiction. William Collins, referring
to England and Wales, suggests that, "the
very idea of an education of their own
would have seemed monstrous to early
Quakers, with their denunciation of the
preacher who had studied at Oxford and
Cambridge, and their dependence for all
necessary instruction upon the immediate
revelation of the Spirit to the individual
Christian" . [note: Hancock, p. 14.] Collins goes on to suggest
that, in fact, exclusive education institutions
in Britain would have been of the "greatest
use as a means of holding the children
together at the most impressionable age" . [note: Ibid.]
If a basic difference can be seen between
Britain and Ireland in this regard, the reason
for it can be cited from three aspects.
Initially, the isolation of the early Quakers
in Ireland not only from each other but also
from the parent group must be taken into
account. Secondly and related to the first,
was the early imposition of Quaker
"discipline" in Ireland. The apostle of the
Society of Friends in the country, William
Edmundson, had at the time of the
Restoration, when a general imprisonment
Quakers was decreed, successfully
petitioned the Lords Justices that they be
allowed liberty throughout the land. But
legal opposition to the Society and the
"sufferings" of members led to a falling off,
and Edmundson was determined that
"discipline" be introduced. He persuaded
George Fox to come to Ireland in 1669, and
both men travelled throughout the country
in that year establishing meetings and
drawing up regulations for the conduct of
the Society's members. [note: cf. Grubb, pp. 29,30.] This activity was
conservative in the extreme, rules for
marriage, habits of dress and speech, modes
of walking and furnishing, were laid down,
departure from which could lead to
excommunication. It is not difficult to
accept exclusive schooling as the prerogative
of a religion whose members were required
to be definably different from those
around them.
Finally there was the real problem of the
existing schools in Ireland. In l675, the
number of schools which were both legally
and illegally operative is difficult to discern.
The establishment of three systems of
education had been attempted by British
monarchs and sanctioned by the Irish
parliament. The first attempt had been made
by Henry VIII and ratified in 1537. The
king's scheme for the foundation of parish
schools had been part of a wider programme
of social control and in keeping with this
programme, the schools which were to be
established in each parish in the Pale area
under the control of those who had taken
Holy Orders of the Established Church,
were to be centres wherein children might
learn "the English tongue, language, order
and condition". [note: Donald Akenson, The Irish Education Experiment, London, 1970, p. 22.]
In spite of fines for
failure to comply with the act, it is open to
question whether or not any parish schools
were founded until after the Restoration.
There were initially not enough clergy to
teach nor were they rich enough to support
teachers. According to Edmund Spencer,
in l569, "the benefices themselves are so
mean that they will not yield any competent
maintenance for any minister to live upon,
scarcely to buy him a gown". [note: M. Jones, The Charity School Movement, Cambridge, 1938, p. 223.]
The parish
school act had to be reinforced at least three
times from 1695 until the end of the
eighteenth century. However, even if some
schools had existed in 1675, the sole fact
that their administration was in the hands
of the clergy of the Established Church,
would have made them totally unacceptable
to the members of the Religious Society of
Friends. A second set of Tudor schools had
been established by Elizabeth and their
foundation sanctioned by the Irish
Parliament in l570. Their purpose, like
Henry's, was to buttress a further policy of
political and social control. They were,
however, second level schools, and more
obviously aimed at the middle classes. It
appears that although a number of these
schools did come into existence, amending
legislation had to be used both to close
defunct establishments and grant financial
aid to those which remained. In 1791, only
eighteen such schools were in operation. [note: Akensoll, p. 27.]
Since, as with the parish schools, these
schools were mainly under the control of
the archbishops of the Reformed Church,
they could not have been attended by
Quaker children. Finally, the Stuarts, in
1612 and 1614 and 1629, set up schools
which became known as "royal schools".
Although they were intended specifically
for the children of planters-among whom
Quaker children might well have been
numbered-these schools' endowments
were to be held by prelates of the Established
Church. [note: Ibid., p. 28.] Such administrative arrangements
would again have precluded their
attendance by members of the Society of
Friends.
Outside the schools instituted by
monarchs and statutorily endowed, there
was no group of schools which might have
been called a system. There were schools
which had been established by private
benefaction such as Kilkenny College, the
1670 Dublin Blue Coat Hospital, the Blue
Coat School in Stephen's Hospital in Cork
whose finances were reinforced by monies
from the city Corporations but on all of
whose boards of governors were archbishops
and bishops of the official church.
A maintained City School existed in Dublin
from about 1660. Although it appears to
have been supported entirely from city
founds and no clergymen were governors, it
was intended for the education of the
children of poor freemen of the city. [note: Mac Lysaght, p. 209.]
Although many of its pupils-including in
1662, the future Duke of Marlborough - did
not fall into that category, Quaker
children whose parents were expressly
forbidden to take oaths which were a
necessary preliminary to borough and
corporation membership, would not have
attended the school. [note: cf. 5 above.] The main bulk of the
population in 1675, was Catholic, but no
system of maintained schooling existed for
them. Attempts by Catholic prelates, clergy
and lay-men to found schools, had been
continually subjected to fluctuations in
favour with which the population as a body
had been viewed by those in power. In
1670, several Catholic schools appear to
have been flourishing in Limerick parishes.
MacLysaght suggests because it was in
Limerick "resistance was stoutest" to the
1641 -52 war. Archbishop Oliver Plunkett,
up to 1675, maintained out of his private
income, public schools in the diocese of
Armagh. The principal one of these schools
was in Drogheda under the charge of three
Jesuits. The diocese of Ossary also appears
to have had public schools during this
time.[note: Mac Lysaght, p. 306.] By, 1679, however, Plunkett was in
prison and the schools had been closed three
years earlier during the oppressive viceroyalty
of Essex. What other education was
given to Catholic children was given by
obscure laymen in out of the way parishes
where their activities were not easily
brought to the notice of the authorities.
The schools were clandestine and the schoolmaster
precursors of the hedge schoolmaster and town masters of the eighteenth
century. As a mode of education for
children of members of the Society of
Friends, they were, of course, totally
unsuitable.
The decision of the September, 1675,
Meeting of the Society to found one large
school near Castledermot to which all the
children of Friends in Ireland might have
recourse, was not promulgated with a great
degree of success. A small class was set up
in Mountmellick in 1677, a national
boarding school, however, was not
established. [note: Education Portfolio, pp. 7-11.]
Primarily this was due to lack
of financial support for the venture.
Members of the society in urban areas had
begun to venture into trade but restrictions
of the English trading policy made such
excursions extremely hazardous and huge
losses were often sustained in exports. The
records of the Society from 1678 onwards
indicate that a compromise was made and
that several day schools were set up in parts
of the country where a population
concentration would guarantee support.
These decisions were taken at Yearly and
Half Yearly Meetings, and each schoolmaster
of the seventeenth century, as far as
can be ascertained, was sent from Britain.
Surveillance by leading English Quakers
such as George Fox and Robert Barclay
appear to have been kept on the selection of
these teachers. Thus, Fox recommended
Richard Gawith as a master for Cork in
1678, Barclay selected the earliest Dublin
master, Alexander Seaton, in 1680. These
teachers were offered fixed salaries, with
"diat and lodgings". When Gawith emigrated
in 1685, his post was worth £16
per annum, and Samuel Forbes who
followed Seaton in Dublin was guaranteed
£30 per annum in 1693. [note: Ibid.] The notion of
centralised control of Quaker education
was obvious from the earliest incursions of
the Society into schooling. Forbes was
dismissed by the Dublin Meeting because
parents were not satisfied with his teaching
of writing. [note: Grubb, p. 91.] The school at that stage had so
expanded-mainly as a result of the number
of Quaker refugees who poured into Dublin
during the Williamite Wars-that it was
shortly necessary to replace him by two
masters.
From the time of Charles II's death in
1685 to the signing of the Treaty of
Limerick, leading members of the Society
in Ireland found themselves in politically
conflicting situations. The viceroyalty of
Richard Talbot brought rapid changes in
the denominational composition of
administrative posts and Catholic interests
in the guilds and corporations were
strengthened. Anthony Sharp, a leading
Dublin Quaker, realised that such intervention
would debar members of the
Society from being involved in the guilds
and in trades such as weaving with which
they were primarily associated. He
petitioned the Lord Deputy for a form of
promise which Quakers might take on
entry and was granted it by James II. The
following year, 1689, Sharp and another
Quaker, Claridge, were made Aldermen of
the city of Dublin. Their acceptance of these
offices was not much to George Fox's
liking. "To join with them, in their strange
kind of gowns," he admonished Sharp, "or
habits or formalities, that is not like the
Truth which denies the pomps and fashions
of the world''. [note: Ibid., p. 51.] Before Sharp and Claridge
could do much more than call a meeting to
discuss with Dublin Friends what course of
action might be taken, the war between
James and William was raging. James was
a personal friend of William Penn's and it
was acknowledged that Penn had exerted
influence on James with regard to the
treatment of Friends during this reign. This
placed Quakers in a strange position in
relation to other Dissenters and planters
during the war. They were accused of
harbouring Jacobites; of maintaining a
regiment in the Irish army; of being Jesuits.
None of the accusations could be substantiated.
Sharp, as the leading Friend in Dublin,
wrote that he was in "constant attendance
on whichever King-James or William - happened
to be in Dublin," but, solely to
elicit "promise of protection for Friends
North and South". [note: Ibid., p. 53.] During the war years,
the attitude of the native Irish to the
Quakers appears to have undergone a
change. In Cork, during the seige, when
other Protestants were imprisoned, the
members of the Society were at liberty,
''the Irish believing there was no danger
from us," according to Joseph Pike. [note: Thos. Lunham, Quakers in Cork, Journal of Cork Historical and Archaelogical Society, Vol. X., 1904, p. 106.]
Some
explanation of the change was probably due
to the known friendship of Penn and Sharp
with James and to the fact that it was a
Quaker, Francis Randall of Wexford who
housed and supplied transport to a ship for
James after the Boyne.
In terms of the organisation of the
Society, the war brought irreversible
changes. A defined demographic movement
began after Limerick which resulted
in less isolated communities concentrated
to the south east, east and eastern midlands.
Accompanying the population movement
was a discernible inclination towards greater
rigidity of discipline. At the Half Yearly
Meeting in May, 1692, William Edmundson
and Joseph Pike urged the appointment of
"overseers" to visit families to ensure that
regulations relating to conduct ratified by
the National Meeting were carried out.
This, Isabel Grubb points out, was not
typical of English Quakerism. [note: Grubb, p. 82.] Whereas,
it led, in terms of the Irish Friends to
isolation and exclusiveness, it also led, in
terms of attitudinal response of Irish
Catholics, to reinforcement of the idea that
there was "no danger" from members of
the Society in terms of religious proselytism
or political manipulation. This was
particularly true after the banishment acts
had been passed on Catholic clergy in 1697.
During the next quarter of a century,
exclusive Quaker schools continued to be
established and maintained by the Society
as a whole. A pattern of local foundation,
accompanied by aid and sanction from
Meetings, and "overseeing" by elders was
clearly formulated by the beginning of the
eighteenth century. Schools were founded
at Clonmel and Waterford. A school at
Edenderry, under the supervision of
Ebenezer and Margaret Mellor appears to
have been a boarding school, as the records
indicate their acceptance of beds and
bedding from Thomas Bewley as gifts. [note: Education Portfolio.]
Curricula centred on reading, writing,
arithmetic and Latin, in some cases, for
boys; girls were taught reading and needlework.
Some fees were charged-for
instance, Latin scholars were charged nine
shillings per quarter, but writing and
arithmetic combined cost only six
shillings. [note: Grubb, p. 91.] It appears that some class
divisiveness existed within the schools. It
can be pointed out, of course, that Commitees
of Friends were always prepared to
assist outstanding poor scholars, at the same
time in harmony with social class thinking
at the time the less well off Friend had to
prove his ability. As well as operating a
virtual inspection scheme, the National
Meeting summoned schoolmasters to confer
on teaching methods , and school books
were scrutinized and selected by the
Meeting before their dispersion to the
schools.
Thus a specific Quaker Latin Grammar
was issued to "avoid the moral unsuitability
of the examples and extracts in the current
Grammar". [note: Ibid.] Changes were made in other
texts, and French could be learned only
with the consent of the Elders. It can be
suggested then, that an efficient system of
schooling had been initiated by the Society
by the beginning of the eighteenth century,
whereby an inspectorial scheme, centralized
text distribution, control of teaching
methods and financial assistance plans, had
been established. Added to these may be
three further aspects of Quaker education.
Firstly, the connection with the parent
group, secondly the method of religious
instruction; and thirdly the apprenticeship
schemes which were connected with the
schools. The relationship with the British
group can be seen most obviously from
examination of the method of recruitment
of masters. The second aspect-religious
instruction-although not as clearly observable
in the seventeenth as in the eighteenth
century-followed logically from a basic
tenet of the Society. This insisted on the
possibility of immediate communion
between God and man, led to the rejection of
an interpretative body and to the reading
of the Scriptures without catechetical
instruction. It was perhaps this aspect of
Quaker schooling more than any other
which led to a situation, at least in one
school, which positively contradicted the
aspirations of exclusiveness which permeated
the 1675 Meeting's Minutes on
education, and further contradicted the
recommendations on aloofness from
members of other sects, of the 1701
National Meeting. Mary Leadbetter, the
granddaughter of the founder of this school
at Ballitore, was able to write; "It succeeded
beyond the humble hopes of its conductors
(the Shackletons), so that not only those of
their own society and of the middle rank,
but many persons of considerable note and
of various denominations (italics mine) placed
their children under their care". [note: Mary Leadbetter, Memoirs and Letters of Richard and Elizabeth Shackleton, London, 1822, p. 3.] It is
impossible to point to any particular reasons
why this should have happened-what is
important about Ballitore, in the general
context of Quaker development in Ireland,
is that the inter-denominationalism of the
school was a weather vane to both a change
in the sectarianism of the Society and to a
basis upon which schools in general might
be founded for all denominations.
The question must arise as to what
denominations other than Quakers were
educated at Ballitore from its foundation
in 1726. It would appear that members of
the Established Church and Dissenters
rather than Roman Catholics were educated
at the boarding school. Mary Leadbetter
mentions Edmund Burke and his brothers
Richard and Garrett being boarders in 1741,
and each incident of non-Quaker entry
cited by her relates to children of Protestant
parents. [note: Ibid., p. 4, p. 30.] If some children of Catholic
parents did attend the school, they were in
all probability, children of middle and upper
class parents who could afford to pay fees,
and whose entry would have been much
conditioned by lack of alternatives. [note: When Ballitore accepted day pupils, Catholics did begin to attend. Eight members of the family of Paul, Cardinal Cullen,attended the day school from 1806-1826, cf Peadar Mac Suibhne, Paul Cullen and his Contemporaries, Naas, (Vol. 1),
1961, p. 2. However, when the future Cardinal was there the day school had become known as the Lancasterian Village
School and was under the auspices of the Kildare Place Society. It was conducted then by James White and his wife
Elizabeth (nee Shackleton). cf 19th Report of the Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor, Dublin, 1831, Appendix,
vi, p. 99.]
Children of Catholics, outside these groups,
continued in the eighteenth century to rely
on the illegal hedge schools and town
schools, except in periods when the
proselytizing schools of voluntary societies
had succeeded in disguising their practical
intentions of social control and cheap
labour.
The most infamous of these schools were
those of the Incorporated Society which was
established in the latter half of the eighteenth
century. The Society's schools were a
development from an abortive attempt,
begun in 1703, to parallel British Charity
School movement in Ireland. Whereas, the
movement in Britain was seen as mirroring
the benevolent philanthropy of eighteenth
century reformers, its introduction into
Ireland must be seen as a further (though
voluntary) effort to establish forms of social
control through education institutions. The
framers of the Charity School movement in
Ireland, cited as their objectives, the
founding of schools as a means by which
"the whole nation might become Protestant
and English and such rebellions as have
heretofore arisen from the difference
between us in Religion, Language and
Interest, may, for the future be prevented". [note: Jones, p. 222.]
The schools were managed by local
committees of subscribers, finances were
augmented by collections taken on Sundays
in Protestant churches, donations from
city corporations and Cathedral chapters,
and fines for breaches in the penal code.
Basic to the curricula in the early schools
were reading, writing, arithmetic and "the
principles of the Christian Religion as
professed by the Anglican Church". [note: Ibid., P. 224.]
Allied to, and at times dominating, the
curricula was a type of trade teaching which
in some instances became a euphemism for
child labour. The conspicuous success of
the Charity School movement in Britain
must be contrasted with its lack of success in
Ireland. The most obvious dichotomy
between the two countries was the religious
profession of the majority populations. By
hindsight, it can be seen that the notion of
an education appropriate to a particular
class had been pervasive in both countries.
In a century which accepted the notion of
an immutable social order this was the
"hidden curriculum". Peculiar to Ireland,
however, was the more blatant attempt at
manipulation through religious indoctrination.
But the most immediate and obvious
fault lay in its lack of direction and lack of
resources. In November, 1731, the Mayor
of Cork, reported to the Irish House of
Lords that in spite of the corporation's
support for the schools, there were "several
Popish school masters in the City and
Suburbs but cant (sic) find out the number
of them; really it is with the utmost concern
we observe the great growth of Popery
among us". [note: Sean O Coindealbhain, Schools and Schooling in Cork City, Journal of the Cork Historical and Archaelogical Society,
Vol. XLVIII, 1943, p. 48.]
Bishop Boulter of Armagh,
had, in the previous year more fully
attested to the ineffectiveness both of the
old state endowed schools and the new
voluntary scheme. He petitioned a crown
charter so that "a sufficient number of
English Protestant schools be erected and
established, wherein the children of the
Irish natives (sic) might be instructed in the
English tongue, and the fundamental
principles of true religion, to both of which
they are generally great strangers". [note: Akenson, p. 31.] In
terms of social manipulation, this was a
fresh attempt to use schools to extra-educative
ends. The debatable question as
to whether an entire population could be
brought to heel by means of a set of
institutions was not raised, and a charter of
incorporation was granted to Boulter and
his fellow petitioners in 1733. A society
named "The Incorporated Society in
Dublin for Promoting English Protestant
Schools in Ireland" was established. Initially
the society was financed by private
donations, but the king in 1738 granted
£l,000 per annum to it, and a further £l,000
(the duty from peddling) was assigned to it
by the government. Finally, an outright
Parliamentary grant of £3,500 per annum
was sanctioned. [note: Ibid., p. 32.] Organisationally the
society was more efficiently run than its
predecessors. Some attempt at a system of
education was undertaken by the central
committee of fifteen. They, with the
assistance of two sub-committees, supervised
the work of local groups who were
set up to oversee the management of
schools in selected locales. Watson's Irish
Almanack of 1784, returns the number of
schools in operation for the previous year
as 41, sited in 32 counties. A total number
of l,372 pupils for that year was computed
and a projection of l,895 was made for the
following year. From the time of the
Society's foundation, 4,960 children had
been apprenticed to Protestant masters (the
only form of apprenticeship sanctioned),
and 448 marriage portions had been paid [note: Watson's Irish Almanack 1784, Dublin, 1784, p. 80.]
(paid to every past pupil of the school on
"his or her marrying a Protestant"). The
later schemes had been initiated as buttresses
to the social manipulation programme.
After 1776, when it was decreed that only
children "born of Papists and such as would
be bred Papists if neglected" [note: Ibid.] would be
admitted to the schools: the Society
attempted a policy of child transplantation
so that children would become totally
immersed 111 the institutions while
geographically removed from their
parents. [note: Ibid., p. 81.]
A series of nursery schools for
children from the ages of two to six was
set up in Monasterevin, Monivea, Shannon
Grove and Milltown Road in Dublin. In
spite of the monetary inducements, the
guarantee of shelter and clothing for poor
children, the educational institutions of the
Incorporated Society were failures.
Although approximately l,000 children per
year came under the Society's care from
1733 to 1803, the number in relation to the
total number of children in the country was
small. The hedge schools and town masters
continued to attract the majortiy of
Catholic children, and by l803 it was seen
that as far as the objectives of the Society
as formulated by Boulter were concerned,
they had not been realised. In that year the
committee opened the doors of the schools
to children of all denominations. What was
of most importance in terms of the development
of a consensus upon which the basis of
a popular education system might rest was
the public condemnation made of the
Incorporated Society, its aims and methods,
by prison reformers, members of the Irish
Commons, and two groups of Education
Commissioners. [note: Akenson, pp. 34, 35.] While it seemed certain,
by the beginning of the nineteenth century,
that no scheme of education which even
remotely smacked of social control by
religious manipulation would be tolerated
in Ireland, it still remained a social fact that
no system of education existed which would
meet the needs of the population.
That the government might endow
specific schools for the education of
Catholics was statutorily forbidden. The
Catholic Relief Acts of 1782 and 1892 had
legalised the position of Catholic school
teachers and repealed the laws forbidding
the education of students in Catholic
Colleges abroad. The previous acts had not,
it was stated, "answered the desired
effect". [note: Ibid., p. 44.] But they did not solve the
problem of education at first level for the
majority of the population. While the
activities of the hedge and town school
masters were no longer clandestine, their
training, their unknown number, and finally
their lack of finances, militated against the
extension of their teaching to any viable
degree. Furthermore, it was in the cities,
where the illegal schools had been least
obvious, that the need appeared most. The
conciliatory 1779 act which abolished trade
restrictions and the establishment in 1782
of an Irish Parliament had stimulated the
growth and development of the cities, they
also stimulated a demographic movement
towards them as centres of work. An entry
in the Council Book of Cork Corporation
stated that the city was "infected with
begging children". [note: Sean Ó Coindealbhain, op cit, p. 48.]
Efforts had been made
in that city, illegally initially, by Nano
Nagle, and legally in 1791, by the Cork
Charitable Society (with the co-operation
of the Catholic bishop, Doctor Moylan) to
set up a series of schools to meet the
educational needs of these children. [note: Ibid., p. 49.] Nano
Nagle's first schools were set up in 1769 for
both boys and girls. As a Catholic, her
action was in blatant defiance of the
existing laws and it was brought to the
notice of the Corporation. They "became
indignant at such violation of the law
against Catholics," but finally, a report
reads, "wiser counsels prevailed" [note: Ibid., p. 50.] and her
actions were left unmolested. By 1777, Miss
Nagle had founded a religious order, but in
spite of the fact that a series of schools had
been set up, the concentration of the sisters
was on the education of girls alone, and it
was definably Catholic. It was obvious that
official financial aid by means of grants or
endowments would not be forthcoming to
it from any government agency. That these
barriers to the extension of the sisters'
teaching, was apparent to the philanthropists
in Cork in 1791, appears true. In that year,
a number of gentlemen who included the
Catholic bishop, set up the Cork Charitable
Society, whose declared objects were to
"provide instruction, free school requisites,
clothing and employment for poor Roman
Catholic children of the city". [note: Ibid., p. 50.] The
Society was to be financed by public subscription
and charity sermons. Five years
later the Minute book of the Society records
that 728 boys and 142 girls were under the
tutelage of eight male and two female
teachers. [note: Ibid.] The number of children
continued to increase, and what was of
interest in terms of the possibility of official
aid, was that the intake to the schools
became interdenominational (although
heavily weighted in favour of Catholics).
By the beginning of the nineteenth century
the schools were no longer advertised by the
Committee as being for Roman Catholic
children, they were described as "The Poor
Schools." With the increase of pupils - over
a thousand children per annum were
being educated by 1806-it became
imperative that a method of teaching, a
means of teacher training and a qualified
superintendent come under the auspices of
the Society. In May, 1806, the Committee
published an advertisement in the local
newspapers in which they stated that a
young man of "good education and sound
morals" was required by them. He would
be sent to England to "obtain a Practical
Knowledge" of Joseph's Lancaster's plan of
Education. Thereafter he would be in
charge of the Poor Schools and would train
others to teach in the methods of Mr.
Lancaster. [note: Ibid.] If a plan of popular education
were to gain government approval, in Cork,
it seemed that that of the Charitable Society
might engender that plan.
In Dublin, however, parallel types of
schools had been established five years earlier
than the Cork Society's schools. These were
the Dublin Weekly and Daily Schools in
School Street in St. Catherine's Parish. The
Weekly schools commenced in January,
1786, and by the beginning of the century
their yearly intake was about 450 pupils.
The Daily Schools opened a few years later,
their intake averaged out over three years
was 935, per annum. [note: Watson's Treble Almanack, 1819, Dublin, 1819, p. 14; H. Kingsmill Moore, The Centenery Book of the Church of Ireland
Training College, Dublin, 1911, p. 3.]
The schools were set
up by "some judicious individuals," and
were managed by a committee. The most
active members of the committee were
Quakers-three members of the La Touche
family and Samuel Bewley. As regards
endowment potential these schools were in
an even more favourable position than the
Poor Schools of Cork. Although the main
religion professed by the children was
Catholicism, the committee who managed
the schools positively stated that all scholars
were admitted "without distinction of
Religious opinions". [note: Watson, 1819, p. 14.] Pupils were taught
reading, writing, arithmetic and were
provided with books and paper.
Since the main body of the committee
were Quakers, it is important to discuss
changes within Quakerism by which professing
members might have moved from
the general conservative attitude of the
Society which was apparent in the
beginning of the eighteenth century, and
secondly, briefly to examine the work of
the Quaker, Joseph Lancaster.
The steps towards non-exclusiveness in
education which was first noticeable in the
Shakleton's school at Ballitore in the 1730's
was not a pattern which seems so early
discernible in the main body of Quakerism.
This is most clearly indicated by the concern
of the "itinerant ministers" to Ireland in the
century with education for Quaker children.
One of the most notable ministries was that
of Sarah Grubb. She made three journeys,
the first in November, 1782, the second in
September, 1785, and the third in 1787. [note: R. Jackson, Some Account of the Life and Religious Labours of Sarah Grubb, Dublin, MDCCXCIII, pp. 87, 89, 92, 100,
183, 195.]
Her accounts of these journeys show her
concern with "the State of true religion
(Quakerism) in Ireland" rather than with
any evangelical purpose. She found "great
indifference and insensibility as to the
knowledge of the Lord's direct dealing with
his people",[note: Ibid., p. 97.] particularly in Cavan and
Dublin. In order to stem the movement
away from the older tenets of the Society
she decided to open a school in Ireland.
Without equivocation she stated her
objectives. "This earnest labourer for the
good of mankind, feels it her duty to
cultivate the one ground of general
reformation through education", [note: Ibid., p. 183-4.]
she
wrote in her diary. Some of the existing
Quaker schools were beginning to reflect
a tendency within the Society as a whole
in Ireland and show "too comfortable a
degree of sympathy" [note: Ibid., p. 185.] with persons and
movements outside themselves. Her school,
in order to combat this would present "a
guarded and religious education. " [note: Ibid., p. 183.]
Sarah
Grubb bought a house on an island in the
Suir and set up a school with her husband
late in 1787. Her ministry and actions can
be seen as contrasting radically with those
of the Quakers on the School Street School
committee in the previous year. That the
actions of the committee, however, were
not long to remain those of an isolated
group, can be attested to by a resolution
which was accepted, albeit by a small
majority, at the 1800 Dublin Yearly
meeting. The resolution stated that Friends
were "trying to look away from the small
circle of their own interests to the world
about them and to realise that many needed
their help". [note: Grubb, pp. 135-6.] In order to become humble
followers of Christ, Friends ought to
become engaged in the relief of distress by
visiting and helping the sick, by "affording
them the means of attaining a comfortable
livelihood ... by promoting the education
of their poor neglected children" .[note: Ibid.]
Opposition to the motion was couched in
the older tenets of Quakerism. Such
activities were seen as having an organisational
basis, and of "running ahead of the
direct guidance of the Spirit".[note: Ibid.]
Although the notion of social place was
inherent to the resolution, the idea of
control by members of the Society of any
education institution was markedly absent.
Samuel Bewley as a mover of the resolution
and one who had been practically involved
in what it had Codified, clearly saw the
implications of his actions. In a letter to
Thomas Spring Rice, some years later, he
explained his stand on inter-denominational
education. [note: Samuel Bewley-Thomas Spring Rice, 8, or 12 month, 18 18 or 1828. (It seems most likely that this letter was written
in 1828, when the question of religious instruction was under review, cf. AkenSon, pp. 102-104). These and all the following
letters from Bewley are in the Church of Ireland Training College, Rathmines, Dublin. They are in two files, the
Lancaster File and General Correspondence File.]
It is important to take into
account that the notion of Catholic
administration of schools was completely
outside his sphere of reference, and that his
attitude was coloured both by the
condemnations of the ex1stmg state
supported schools and the new philanthropic
aspect of Quakerism. All children, he said,
should be admitted to first level schools and
"taught together without the slightest trace
of difference being made between them". [note: Ibid.]
This was the only way in which "the rising
generation (will be) brought up in love and
harmony with each other instead of with
aversion and distrust". [note: Ibid.] The particular
tenets of denominations would be taught
out of school "by parents and pastors",
while general reading of the scriptures "as
preparing the way for their obtaining this"
could be undertaken by sufficiently
advanced pupils.[note: Ibid.] It was in this spirit that
he had engaged himself with the School
Street School, with the plan of education of
Joseph Lancaster, and with the committee
of the Society for the Promotion of the
Education of the Poor. Bewley's relationship
with Lancaster can be most accurately
attested to in the first year of the operation
of the Society for the Promotion of
Education of the Poor. However, from
examination of the correspondence which
survives from this period, it is certain that
the two men had been in consultation for a
number of years mainly as a result of
Bewley's concern with the School Street
School, and Lancaster's concern with a
similar venture which had gained wide
recognition, in London. Lancaster claimed
that he had perfected a method of teaching
one thousand children which only
demanded the presence of one qualified
teacher. He had also produced a text book
for outlining this method of teaching and
had set up a teacher training scheme. As a
philanthropic Quaker, his ideas on religious
instruction coincided closely with Bewley' s.
"Above all things," he wrote, "education
ought not to be subservient to the propagation
of the peculiar religious teaching of any
sect . . . as a member of the Society of
Friends I want to avoid making their (the
children's) education a means of instilling
my own peculiar religious tenets". [note: Joseph Lancaster, Improvements in Education, London, 1806, pp . viii, ix, xiii.]
That Bewley should have consulted with
Lancaster is not strange, neither is it
difficult to accept that both men should
have been concerned with the expansion
of Lancaster's plan to schools in Ireland.
However, that neither should have
taken into account a basic difference
between the area of Lancaster's operation
and Bewley's was to prove personally
tragic for the Irish man. The difference
centred on the dichotomy between the
majority populations of the two countries - one
Protestant, the other Catholic and their
differences in attitude to religious
instruction. Members of the majority
church in Britain found no difficulty in the
acceptance of the notion of non-catechetical
instruction, but the majority church in
Ireland was a teaching church. To Catholics,
as Lord Stanley pointed out in his letter to
the Duke of Leinster in 1831, "the reading
of Holy Scriptures without note or comment
by children must be peculiarly
obnoxious ... (since) even to adults the
right of unaided private interpretation of
the Sacred Volume in articles of religious
belief" [note: Report of the Commissioners of National Education in Ireland, 1834-1841, incl., Dublin, 1842, pp. vii-xiii.]
was denied. This was never taken
into account by Bewley nor by the early
committee members of the Society for the
Promotion of the Education of the Poor.
Their greatest concern was that the schools
established and maintained under their
auspices should be free from any accusations
of religious proselytism, and secondly that
a systematic plan of organisation be
established. That the Quaker, Samuel
Bewley, was the member most deeply
involved with the second plan, that the
notions inherent to its operation were those
which had been basic to the organisation of
Quaker schools cannot be overlooked.
The first meeting of the Society was held
on 2 December, l8ll in the premises of the
School Street Schools. The principles on
which the Society would operate were laid
down; education for "all classes of professing
Christians without interfering with
the peculiar religious opinions of any"; the
method of carrying this out-establishment
of schools wherein they might "be
instructed in reading, writing and arithmetic
upon a cheap and expeditious plan," and
where "Scriptures without note or
comment should be used". [note: Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor in Ireland, 1st Report, Dublin, 1813, p. 2.]
In the realm of
practicalities the Society proposed that it
would operate in an advisory capacity on
the subject of curricula planning; would
contribute financially towards the maintenance
and foundation of new schools; assist
in providing qualified masters and
inspectors, and set up a depository for the
distribution and sale of books and school
requisites. The publication of a report on
the Society's formation met with widespread
interest. On 4 January, 1812, the
Chairman received a letter from Thomas
Parnell, a member, who informed him that
a Mr. Finn and "Counsellor O'Connell had
wished to communicate to the Committee
their desire to interest themselves" in the
society's work. These sentiments had been
conveyed to him by Mr. Finn as "those of
the principal Catholics". [note: Thos. Parnell, Chairman, Soc. Prom. Ed. Poor, 3 Jan., 1812., Gen. Corresp. File, CITC. (incorrectly dated-1811 by
Parnell).
Daniel O'Connell subsequently paid the annual
members' subscription. [note: He continued to do so until 1820.]
Joseph Hamilton
of Carrickmacross, a member of the
Catholic Committee, in the same month
assured the new society's Committee that
since Joseph Lancaster's plan was the basis
on which the scheme of education would be
arranged, and it was recognised that this
plan guaranteed religious toleration, there
was no difficulty in predicting support and
success for the Society. [note: Jos. Hamilton, Sec., Soc. Prom. Ed. Poor, Jan ., 1812, Cl5, Gen. Corresp. File, CITC.]
The success of the
plans of the Society then depended not so
much on acceptance by the majority
population of the inter-denominational
principles on which it had been founded,
as on the organisational schemes by which
it would operate. That a superintendent for
the model school and teacher training
programme be employed was imperative,
as was the establishment of the text book
scheme. Administration in these areas was
left in the hands of a sub-committee in
June, l812. [note: cf. Bewley- Lancaster, 23 June, 1812, C I 35, Lane. File, CITC.]
In practical terms it was
Samuel Bewley who conducted this
business, because its successful conclusion
depended on the co-operation of Joesph
Lancaster.
Bewley approached Lancaster in what he
expected would be the manner most
acceptable to the Englishman-as a member
of the Religious Society of Friends. [note: Ibid.] The
Central Committee had commissioned both
Bewely and Richard Warren to make
contact with him in regard to the purchase
of copyright and for recommendation of a
superintendent. Warren wrote a letter, but
on 23 June, 1812, Bewley felt that another
letter couched in the language peculiar to
Quakers would be more likely to arouse
Lancaster's sympathy. Having pointed this
out, Bewley, with some knowledge of
Lancaster's inefficiency, advised him to
reply in a business-like manner without
delay as his letter would be presented to the
Central Committee and "entered on their
proceedings." The superintendent required
by the society would be asked to take
change of a model school where masters
would be trained, and from which qualified
teachers and some inspectors would travel
to such parts of the country as might need
them. "Thou wilt perceive," he wrote,
"that we want a person of proved abilities
... of more advanced age than might be
probably safely placed over a school where
nothing more would be looked for than
merely teaching scholars; making schoolmasters
is something different". [note: Ibid.]
Two letters followed from Lancaster, 
the first was dated, 9 July, the second,
10 July. [note: Lancaster-Bewley, 9 July, and 10 July, 1812. CI 36, Lane. File, CITC.]
Neither was addressed to the
Committee, and both were extremely
unbusinesslike. The fact that the first dealt
with copyright and the second with a
superintendent is fair evidence of this.
Lancaster agreed to the Society's purchasing
copyright of his texts, but mainly concerned
himself with the question of the disposal of
profits arising from the eventual sale of the
books. He suggested that the Society might
set up a fund so that the cost of any future
Journeys of his in Ireland might be defrayed.
On his death, he suggested, the main part of
the profits should accrue to his child, the
rest could be appropriated by the Society
"as a mark of that love which I give to the
children of Erin." The second letter was a
eulogy for a young man named Joseph
Dunn-''a little son of Erin,'' considered by
Lancaster suitable as a superintendent. In
view of Bewley's description of an acceptable
candidate, in particular his emphasis
on such a person's age and experience,
Joseph Dunn was totally unsuitable. [note: Ibid.]
Bewley was forced to communicate
Lancaster's replies to the Central Committee,
who were justifiably annoyed.
William Harding-known to Lancaster - suggested
that he might take "some man"
of proven abilities from some other station
and send him to Ireland. [note: Ibid.] The committee
were equally annoyed at Lancaster's attitude
towards the sale of copyright. The
suggestion that the sale of text books might
bring an accumulation of profits was
ridiculous. Bewley begged Lancaster to
remember that the scheme was concerned
with education of the poor and went so far
as to draft a reply which Lancaster might
send to the committee granting them the
right to use his texts on the receipt of a
copyright fee of one hundred guineas. He
warned him that if he did not -reply "the·
entire business will be frustrated". [note: cf. Bewley-Lancaster, undated copy, but 23 July, 1812 on reverse side of paper. Lane. File, CITC.]
Lancaster took Bewley's advice and on
ll August, replied to the committee
granting them permission to use his books.[note: Ibid.]
This part of the letter was written precisely
as Bewley had advised. The second part of
his letter, however, contained a further
eulogy on Joseph Dunn. There was
"nothing against him but his youth". [note: Lancaster-Bewley, ll August, 1812, inc. letter to committee. CI 37, Lane. File, CITC.]
Throughout the remainder of August and
early September, Samuel Bewley was in
correspondence with Lancaster about the
delivery of the texts. Lancaster, on two
occasions, failed to send perfect and complete
copies. [note: Ibid.] On 10 September, Bewley
wrote to him with great urgency. [note: cf. Bewley-Lancaster, 18 August, 1812; Lancaster-Bewley, 24 August, 1812; note Lancaster-Corry Fowler, l Sept .,
1812; Bewley-Lancaster, IO Sept., 1812; Lane File, CI 40, 41, 42, CITC.]
The
committee were becoming markedly impatient,
it would not be surprising if
Andrew Bell were approached. Bell had
established a teaching plan similar to
Lancaster's and was in 1812 superintendent
of the "National Society for the Promotion
of the Education of the Poor in the
Principles of the Established Church."
Liason between the Dublin society and an
English Established Church society would
be fatal to the general acceptance of the
Irish society. "I beg thee, dear Friend, to
send us everything," he wrote, and finally
reminded Lancaster once again that "a
competent school master is needed" . [note: Bewley-Lancaster, 10 Sept., 1812. Lane. File, CITC.]
After a fortnight, as Lancaster had not
replied, Bewley wrote to William Allen, a
personal friend, a Quaker and treasurer of
Lancaster's school committee in the
Borough Road in London. [note: Bewley-Allen, no day, Sept., 1812, CI 43 , Lane. File, CITC.]
Bewley was
extremely worried. The Committee of the
Society for the Promotion of Education for
the Poor had been prevailed upon by him
to contact Lancaster initially; he, Bewley,
had recommended the purchase 'of
Lancaster's texts and his books on education;
he had suggested that Lancaster would aid
in the recruitment of a superintendent. He
asked for Allen's assistance. Allen promised
to examine the entire question and to report
back without delay to Bewley. [note: Allen-Bewley, no day, Sept,. 1812, CI 44, Lane. File, CITC.]
Before he
had time to do so, Lancaster wrote to him
from a new foundation in Tooting. He
suggested that the Arithmetic texts could
be borrowed from the School Street School
where he had left copies some years
previously. At the same time he proposed
that it might not be necessary to teach Irish
children how to compute. "Really, reading
and spelling lessons are the main thing
wanted in Ireland" .[note: Lancaster-Bewley, Oct., 1812, CI 45, Lancaster File, CITC.] A new candidate for
the post of superintendent was suggested - a
man named Cullen-who had no
experience. Samuel Bewley appears to have
given up the attempt to work with
Lancaster after this. The Arithmetic text
was printed-presumably from the copy in
the School Street School-and he
concentrated on editing and arranging the
distribution of books from the Society's
depository. Three Quaker clerks were
engaged to undertake the day to day
administration of the office. The Society,
however, had not found a person to run
the teacher training scheme. Then, on
9 November, Lancaster wrote to Bewley. [note: Lancaster-Bewley, 9 Nov., 1812, CI 46, Lancaster File, CITC.]
He had found a superintendent. He was a
young man named Veevers, who was
twenty-three years of age. Lancaster
described him as "a Field Marshall among
my young generals . . . my aid du corns
(sic) in the long war I have carried out
Against that ignorance which has so terribly
taken capture the flower of our youth and
led them as victims to the altars of vice and
iniquiefy". [note: Ibid.] More practically, Veevers was
old enough, had had three years experience
in training teachers, and was "prepared to
traverse all Ireland in establishing and
orgadising schools.''
Despite the fact that a salary of £200 per
annum, plus an additional two to five
guineas per head for training teachers, was
demanded by Lancaster for Veevers; that
this was hotly opposed by the Central
Committee; that Bell's society was once
again proposed as a better advisory body
than Lancaster's; and that the final arrangement
as to salary and status had to be
worked out by Bewley and William Allen,
Veevers was finally engaged by the Society.
A teacher training centre in a model school
and an inspectorial scheme had been
established within a year.
A multiplicity of factors-religious,
political, social and economic-must be
taken into account in any examination
made of the structural roots of the Irish
education system. This paper has attempted
to identify one aspect of these factors, that
of the possibility of a relationship between
the organisation of early Quaker schools
system-centralized control of teaching
methods and texts, an inspectorial system
and book distribution scheme-and the
organisational schemes of the Society for
Promoting the Education of the Poor which
were directly passed on to the nineteenth
century National School system. Since,
however, many other facets of Quaker
history in Ireland and the history of Irish
education must be included, the relationship
must be acknowledged as functional
and not deterministic.
By hindsight it can be suggested that
little that is laudatory can be written about
the National School system, the Society for
Promoting the Education of the Poor, and
of Quaker concerns with education. Both
of the systems were arranged as if their
objectives w ere the distribution of a
product, as if an education were what
Raymond Williams call s, "a fixed
abstraction, a settled body of teaching and
learning". [note: Raymond Williams, The Long Revolution, Penguin Books, 1961, p. 145.] The mechanical character of the Lancasterian method m instruction
reinforced this notion and was clearly
related to the acceptance of a classroom
behavioural relationship which was" more
suitable to a factory than to a learning
environment. Basically both systems were
engaged in an active shaping to particular
ends and this shaping was coloured by class
thinking. This process reflected the settled
order of the nineteenth century. If, however,
it can now be seen to exist, in spite of
our declared policies of " equality of
educational opportunity," it must be
recognised as a remnant of a society other
than our own and vigourously criticized.

