Oliver Plunkett was born in Loughcrew, County Meath, in the year
1629. His people were at one time the largest landowners in Meath. They
were staunch Catholics who did not conform to the Protestant religion,
and like all their kind, they were some twenty years after Oliver's birth
dispossessed by the Cromwellians. Oliver's older brother, Edward, was compelled
to surrender his castle and estate to a Colonel Naper.
Loughcrew is close to the little town of Oldcastle in the northwest corner of
the county. This is a hilly region and although the highest of the hills (Slieve na
Caillighe) is only about 900 feet, it affords stupendous views extending as far as
the Wicklow mountains to the south and embracing the silvery glint of Lough
Ramor and other Cavan lakes to the north. Slieve na Caillighe is of prehistoric
interest, having more than a dozen cairns dating back to the Bronze Age, only a
few of which have been excavated.
Loughcrew itself has little remaining to recall the great days of the Plunketts.
The castle, or castellated house, in which Saint Oliver was born has long been
razed, but tradition held that it stood close to an ancient mote. That tradition was
verified in the long dry summer of 1975. Voluntary workers from Oldcastle, bent
on restoring Loughcrew in view of the canonization, discovered traces of the old
building, lines of sun scorched grass giving clues to the foundations. If the birthplace
is gone, the Plunkett church survives. The ruins are being restored so that
eventually the old building will be at least as handsome as the other Plunkett
churches in Killeen, Dunsany and Rathmore. The yews of the Yew Walk
adjacent to the church are- again according to tradition-of Plunkett planting.
This is highly probable, yews are slow to grow and long lasting. In recent years,
Mass has been celebrated in this yew- lined place on a few occasions.
It is hardly necessary to say that there has
been a strong devotion to Saint Oliver in
and around his native place. The news of his
canonization stimulated the local people to
offer their free service and Loughcrew is
undergoing a renewal. Many pilgrimages
are expected to come to the place in future
years. The Oldcastle parish church has
received a major relic of the Saint from
Downside Abbey in England.
Early in his boyhood, Oliver expressed a
desire to become a priest. His kinsman,
Patrick Plunkett, the Benedictine Abbot of
Saint Mary's Abbey, Dublin, took charge of
him and supervised his education. The
times, to say the least, were difficult but
when the youth was sixteen, fortune seemed
to favour him and a chance of fulfilling his
great desire came about. Father Scarampi,
an Oratorian, had been sent to Ireland by
the Pope to advise the Irish Confederate
party in their struggle for religious rights.
The priest's attention was brought to five
boys, Oliver among them, who wanted to
study for the priesthood. Father Scarampi
was very encouraging, promising to take
the boys with him when he returned to
Rome. The plan was duly carried out and
after a journey packed with adventure both
at sea and on land, the group reached Rome.
Here Father Scarampi not only guided, but
also financed the Irish boys.
Oliver proved himself quick to learn and
did well from the beginning at the Irish
College, then a recent foundation conducted
by the Jesuits. He was ordained in 1654 at
the age of twenty-five. It was a period when
the persecution of Catholics was being
fiercely carried out in Ireland. Oliver's
mentors did not think it advisable for him
to return home. As he had done a course in
canon and civil law, he was qualified to
hold the chair of theology in the College
de Propaganda Fide; he was given this
appointment on the recommendation of
his ever loyal friend, Father Scarampi.
Besides teaching in the College, Oliver also
acted as agent for the Irish bishops.
For twelve years Oliver Plunkett was
busily engaged on this work when an event
happened that was to change the whole
course of his life. In the year l669, Edmund
O'Reilly, Archbishop of Armagh, died in
exile in France. During an episcopate of
twelve years, he had been able to spend only
two years in his See-such was the ferocity
of Catholic persecution. Oliver Plunkett
was nominated to succeed Archbishop
O'Reilly. As the greatest secrecy had to be
observed, he was consecrated in Ghent
instead of in Rome. In November, 1669,
the new Archbishop set out for Ireland. On
his way, he stayed for a while in London,
where the Dominican Father Philip Howard
kept him in concealment in his apartments.
It was a severe winter and Oliver was
weather-bound for some weeks and did not
arrive in Ireland until March, 1670.
The Church in Ireland had been greatly
weakened by persistent harassment. There
were in fact only two bishops: one was
Oliver's kinsman, Dom Patrick Plunkett,
who was then Bishop of Meath; the other
was the Bishop of Kilmore, who was
functioning with difficulty, due to age and
infirmity. Three other bishops were living
in exile. Oliver at once set about the work
of general restoration. Due to the absence of
ecclesiastical authority, there was disorder
everywhere among the clergy. Many of
them did not take kindly to the new
Primate's reforming zeal.
The English Viceroy in Ireland when
Oliver landed was Lord John Roberts of
Truro, a fierce anti-Catholic, full of
oppression mania. Oliver was breaking the
law by coming into the country. He could
not make the visitation of his archdiocese
without risking arrest and banishment. To
meet the situation, Oliver had to travel in
disguise; he played the part of an English
soldier, calling himself ''Captain Browne''.
He wore the correct military uniform and
the then fashionable wig; he carried a sword
and pistols. He was reported to Rome for
this "unbecoming" behaviour, or, more
Saint Oliver Plunkett
From a painting attributed to a contempory of Saint Oliver
specifically, for riding around his archdiocese
with a lady seated on the back of his
saddle. Oliver defended himself by saying
that when he went around as Captain
Browne, he had to behave like Captain
Browne: "I sang in the pubs, I kissed the
girls." Once, he explained, when in danger
of capture, he rode for half a mile with a
lady on the back of his saddle; on that
occasion the lady's brother was with them.
It was indeed much ado about nothing.
This bad state of affairs lasted for only
three months of Oliver's primacy. Roberts
was recalled to England and was replaced
by Lord Berkeley of Stratton, a man of a
totally different calibre. His wife was a
Catholic; the new Viceroy was not opposed
to her religion. In addition to this, Lord
Berkeley liked Oliver and became personally
friendly with him. The whole scene was
different. Oliver took full advantage of this
happy interlude and proceeded with
reforms. He considered the worst disadvantage
suffered by his people was the lack
of schools. With Berkeley's permission, he
founded a school near Dundalk under the
rule of the Jesuits. This institute was not
only for the education of boys, but classes
were also held for priests, who could take a
refresher course in theology and get
guidance in cases of conscience. Through
the good offices of Berkeley, Oliver received
from the Crown a small fund to cover
expenses.
Lord Berkeley's term of office provided a
breathing space and Oliver Plunkett made
use of the Heaven sent opportunities. The
vacant sees were filled: Peter Talbot
(Oliver's cousin incidentally) was Archbishop
of Dublin; Oliver's friend, Doctor
Brennan, was appointed to Waterford;
there was a bishop in Tuam. On the surface,
all this seemed good progress, but Oliver's
relation, Dom Patrick Plunkett, Bishop of
Meath, sounded many a warning in the
younger man's ears, not to be hasty in the
matter of discipline and reform. There was
all the time that dread business of praemunire.
It meant that if a priest was dismissed from
his parish, or transferred elsewhere, he could
appeal to the civil authorities, who could
then charge the ecclesiastical superiors with
"exercising foreign jurisdiction". There
were cases all over Ireland where this had
been done.
There was the outstanding case of the
Vicar-General of Derry who had for thirty
years defied all Rome's efforts to remove
him. He continued sacrilegiously to rule the
diocese and enjoy the benefices. Oliver was
determined to end this scandal. His first
move was to win the Viceroy over to his
way of thinking, then he went to the civil
authority in Derry who promised him
support. When Oliver repeated the order
to leave, the usurper as usual rushed to the
head of the local garrison, who rejected him
and told him to obey his Primate. The
discomfited Vicar-General had to retire. He
ruefully told his friends, "The Roman
Primate has unhorsed me."
In his efforts to restore order in his
archdiocese, Oliver took a highly individual
line in his dealing with the Rapparees, or
Tories. Both terms originated in the Gaelic
language: rapaire, meaning a robber; and
toiridhe, a hunted person. The first term was
that originally given by the native Irish to
the English settlers who had robbed them of
their land and homes. The English heard the
word so often from Gaelic speakers that
they anglicised it into Rapparee and used it
to mean any kind of fugitive from justice.
The leaders of the Rapparees were men,
or the sons of men, whose property had
been taken from them either in the early
confiscations or in a wave of more recent
persecution. The dispossessed men took to
the hills and from their different strongholds
continually raided the new owners of their
land. They couldn't get them out, but they
could-and did-make life very uncomfortable
for them. They preyed on
unarmed civilians, usually aliens, but they
would attack natives, too, who were known
to be opposed to them. The sympathy of
the native Irish was, however, almost always
with the Rapparees.
Many of these landless men were ne'er-do-
wells who were attracted to a lawless
life. Many of them were employed by
garrison officers as herds and labourers,
although they were known to be Rapparees.
The soldiers would sell them powder and
shot for which they were paid in a division
of the spoils. In fact a state of disorder
thoroughly suited the army of occupation.
Rapparees and soldiers frequented the same
public houses. One of the outlaws' means of
livelihood was to steal horses and sell them
at distant fairs. The militia would send
buyers to those fairs where they bought
back the horses cheaply. The Rapparees
gave the local garrison an excuse to raid
small farms under the pretence that they
were searching for the outlaws, and they
plundered the hapless tenants of these
holdings.
During Oliver Plunkett's first visitation
of his province, everyone-priests and
people-complained to him about the
Rapparees and urged him "to do something
about them". The Viceroy also appealed to
him to bring the disorder to an end. He
offered them, through the Primate's mediation, a sum of money each and travelling
facilities; the amnesty would extend also to
the families of the outlaws. Plunkett
arranged to meet the leading Rapparees at
their headquarters in the mountains. There
would be nobody with him but one priest
and his servant, James McKenna.
The rank and file of the clergy were
aghast at this plan and utterly opposed it.
Many priests of the province were related
to the Rapparees, who could be their
brothers, cousins, even fathers. The clergy
condemned the outlaws publicly and
privately condoned them. If this was
double-faced, then it was the effect of
persecution. Oliver went to considerable
trouble and took a personal risk in arranging
this meeting. The men gave him a quiet
hearing. But they were deeply suspicious of
the Government's good faith. They were
afraid they might be ambushed on their
way to the port. Oliver promised to travel
with the fifteen leaders in order to get them
away. He rode with them to Dublin and
never left them until they were safely on
board ship .
Peter Talbot, Archbishop of Dublin, was
the strongest critic of Oliver's action. He
sent an angry report to Rome: "Here he is
now with his fifteen bandits in tow all
arrived in the capital city of my archdiocese." Oliver was censured by Rome,
who called his work with the Rapparees
"A sign of the Viceroy' s confidence in him,
indecorous, unbefitting his rank, full of
infinite danger." However, his superiors in
Rome fully exonerated him at a later date,
when they were better informed.
Oliver's episcopal work intensified: he
assembled a Synod in Clones and held
ordination ceremonies elsewhere. The
arrears in Confirmation were enormous
due to the continual banishment of bishops'.
After two years, Berkeley was recalled
and replaced by Lord Essex as Viceroy, who
had no tolerance of Catholics and renewed
the persecution. The subsidy from the
Crown for the schools vanished. But Oliver
went on with his work. The priests of
Armagh testified: "In the diocese of
Armagh, Kilmore, Clogher, Derry, Down,
Connor and Dromore, although far
separated from each other, he administered
Confirmation to thousands in the woods
and the mountains, heedless of winds and
rain." The contrast was marked: the climate
of Rome is genial and dependable, sometimes
with only a month of winter. It must
have been a severe test of endurance for
Oliver to come to terms again with the
Irish weather.
In a letter dated 1 November, 1671,
Bernard Magurk sent thanks to his superiors
in Rome for being appointed Vicar-General
of Rap hoe. He made this comment:
"Impelled solely by spiritual motives have I
embraced this province in a region so
sterile, rough and rugged. I confess, too,
that the exhortations of the most illustrious
Primate, confirmed by his own example
moved me very much: for often has he
Confirmed the children in these mountains
and woods, and often too, has he had no
other food than oaten bread, salt butter, and
stirabout, and no drink but milk. We are all
amazed how a man of such a delicate
constitution, and so delicately (as I myself
have known) reared in Rome, should be
able to undergo so many labours, so many
journeys, so many rugged and difficult
enterprises.''
But as to Confirmation there was something
the Archbishop disliked even more
than the weather, and that was the haste - the
furtive, indecent and frenzied haste
imposed by circumstances. In his view, it
clouded the splendour of the liturgy. Signo
te signo crucis, as he placed the chrism on
those rows and rows of foreheads as quickly
as his lips could formulate the words and his
hands and feet could move. Et confirmo te
chrismate salutis, giving a light touch to
every cheek as he walked back again along
the ranks of faces. And still they came in
wave after wave: five hundred today in this
parish, a thousand tomorrow in a parish at
the other end of the province. He admitted
in a letter that those long Confirmation
ceremonies took such a toll of his physical
reserves, that when he finished, he could not
stand.
"They swarm to the Confirmation like
flies," he reported. It was not a case of
Confirming children only. Men and women
of all ages came before him, their faces
stamped with every kind of disease and
misfortune. Barefooted, half starved and in
rags, they went to incredible lengths to
receive the Sacrament. They thought
nothing of walking twelve, or fifteen miles,
perhaps in a deluge of rain; they were quite
regardless of weather conditions. They
brought with them the infirm members of
their families. Too poor to provide themselves with transport even of the most
primitive kind, they carried their invalids on
their backs over mountains and across bogs.
In their eyes was a famished look for the
Pentecostal grace.
For the Archbishop the long ceremonies
had great compensations. As he moved
among the poor people, he would find
himself sharing their emotion, sensing the
terrific power of faith that charged the
atmosphere. To them he was truly the
representative of Christ, and he had come
from faraway Rome to help them. Oliver
was always telling the priests how this, that
and the other was done in Rome. But here
was something far greater than he had ever
experienced in his twenty-five years in
Rome. These people looked as if they saw
with their eyes the descending tongues of
fire and heard with their ears the rushing of
the mighty wind as the living spirit of God
was infused into them. Adversity had taught
them to depend wholly on the inner power
of religion and, humanly speaking, they had
paid for it to the uttermost farthing in
material loss. There could be no pause here
to sing the great Whitsuntide sequence,
yet never, in effect was the Holy Spirit
invoked with such passionate intensity:
Father of the poor, draw near,
Giver of all gifts, be here:
Come, the soul's true radiancy.
O Thou Light most pure and blest,
Shine within the inmost breast
Of Thy faithful company.
The Archbishop worked frantically to
reduce the arrears. After only three months
in Ireland he reported to Rome : "In a
month and a half I administered Confirmation
to more than 10,000 persons, though
throughout my province I think there yet
remain more than 50,000 persons to be
Confirmed." It took him more than three
years to get level with this work alone. On
15 December, 1673, he reported to the
Secretary of Propaganda: "During the past
four years I Confirmed 48,655 persons."
One of the chief events during the Archbishop's
tenure of office in Ireland was his
settlement of the dispute between the
Dominicans and the Franciscans. Both these
great Orders originally had successful
centres in the dioceses of Armagh, Down,
Dromore and Clogher. During the
Cromwellian invasion, however, their
houses had been closed and their members
scattered. At the Restoration, both Orders
sought to re-establish themselves in the
districts where they had previously been
maintained and loved by the people.
Presently certain territory in all the four
dioceses became the subject of dispute
between the two great Orders; both
claiming that they had the exclusive right
to quest alms from the faithful in the same
areas.
By the time Oliver took up his duties in
Armagh, the dispute between the two
mendicant Orders had already become
acrimonious and both sides had appealed to
Rome for a settlement. Since the dispute
could be ended only by someone in Ireland
who was in a position to make a proper
investigation of the rival claims, the Archbishop
was directed by Rome to examine
the whole question, find a just solution to
the problems arising out of it, and bring the
quarrel to an end. This is the only command
from Rome that Oliver tried to evade. He
had friends in both Orders: men who had
selflessly helped him when he took up the
burden of Primate. He foresaw what would
happen: whatever way he decided the
matter, he would lose friends and make
enemies. There was no choice: Rome
replied by telling him tersely to settle the
dispute.
He began by appointing three counsellors
to help him: the Bishop of Meath and the
Vicars-General of Meath and Kilmore. He
made a visitation of each of the four
dioceses and held an enquiry in every
territory in dispute. As a result of this
investigation, he made an order giving the
Dominicans permission to re-establish themselves
in the contested areas.
Immediately there was uproar in the four
dioceses. "It seemed," said Oliver, "as
though Hell itself were let loose against
me." The Franciscans were deeply offended
and began to wage a furious revolt against
the Archbishop's jurisdiction. They
appealed to Rome and sent an agent there
to present and personally further their point
of view. They were greatly loved by the
Irish laity who for the most part sided with
them. Petitions signed by immense numbers
urged the authorities to restore the
Franciscans to their districts. Rome made
exhaustive enquiries: Oliver's decision was
confirmed formally after a seven year
interval. All the time the Franciscans were
dissatisfied. The Archbishop tried to reason
with them-or, with those who would
listen to him. He pointed out that defective
administration was the cause of the disorder:
they had too many small convents (seventy
in all Ireland), and far too many novitiates
(twelve or thirteen in his province alone,
thirty in the whole of Ireland). As a man
dedicated to law and order in ecclesiastical
affairs, these little, so-called novitiates were
a torment to his mind. He complained to
Rome that the buildings were only huts
without choir and where no real education
was given. The novices mingled with
''serving men and maids, guests and other
chance strangers." Almost anyone could be
a novice; there was no scrutiny of the
applicant's merits. He further complained
that almost every friar had a horse and a
servant: Would not the money be better
spent on books? To the Franciscans, of
course, this was the query of a crank: a
horse, or books? The horse enabled them to
reach people and minister to them; the
Primate wanted them to sit in a corner
studying!
Meanwhile in England the political
position was taking a new shape. King
Charles Ii' had no legitimate children. His
successor would therefore be his brother
James, long suspected of being a Catholic
(with justice as it proved afterwards). A
powerful opposition to the monarchy had
been built up on the succession issue. The
group of rich men who dominated Parliament
and who were therefore the virtual
rulers of England at this time were led by
the first Lord Shaftesbury. His followers
included many Nonconformists as well as
ex-Cromwellian officers who were discontented
with their places in the new regime.
The programme of this powerful opposition
was almost wholly shaped by fear of
Catholic succession to the throne, in other
words by Charles's brother James.
Just as the King began to wage a furious
war with Parliament on this issue, Titus
Oates became a public figure. He was a
clergyman in Anglican orders who began
his acquaintance with Catholics on his
appointment as Protestant chaplain to the
Duke of Norfolk's household in 1677.
Shortly afterwards he became a convert to
the Faith (although he afterwards averred
that his conversion was only feigned).
Claiming that he had a vocation to the
priesthood, he was sent by the Jesuits to the
English college at Valladolid, but he was
expelled after five months. He begged for a
second chance from the Jesuit Provincial
but, after a trial of six months at Saint
Omer's he was again found unsuitable and
sent home. After abandoning the Faith he
had so dubiously held, Titus Oates resumed
acquaintance with a half-crazy fanatic
named Israel Tonge. This man showed a
flattering interest in all that Oates had to tell
him concerning the inside life of Catholic
seminaries. Good and profitable use, he
thought, could be made of such information.
This, in brief, is how the Popish Plot
came to be concocted.
At the Pope's orders, the King was to be
assassinated. The General of the Jesuits had
been given a commission to nominate men
to key positions. All Protestants were to be
massacred . . . This fantastic story spread
like wildfire. The penniless nobody, Titus
Oates, was suddenly rich, important and
popular. Eventually it became a criminal
offence even to express disbelief in the
reality of the Popish Plot.
The Irish side of the Plot is the aspect that
chiefly concerns us here. The Titus Oates
document was found to contain, as one
would expect, several very interesting
articles relating to Ireland. According to
Oates, the French King had arranged to
land an army there with the financial
assistance of the Pope and the Jesuits. As a
consequence of the false rumours, all the
Catholic leaders in Ireland were imperilled.
Towards the end of November, 1679, the
aged Bishop of Meath died. Oliver felt
bound to attend the funeral of this prelate
who had helped him so much to become a
priest. On his way back, he was arrested on
6 December and taken to Dublin Castle.
The Viceroy, Ormonde-not a Catholic
himself but belonging to a Catholic family
and personally well-disposed towards
Plunkett-tried delaying tactics as long as
he dared. But in the end Ormonde had to
give in to the pressure from England; the
trial to take place at Dundalk, was fixed for
23 July. Special instructions were sent from
London that no Catholic should be allowed
to sit on the jury. The charge against
Plunkett was that he had conspired to bring
in the French and take part in the plot to
murder King Charles. The Archbishop's
friends mustered thirty-two witnesses for
his defence, but actually the case was never
heard. The witnesses for the prosecution
were absent. The court waited two days for
them. On the third day, an excommunicated
Franciscan named MacMoyer got in touch
with the lawyers, asking for more time to
bring in witnesses. He was drunk and
looked so disreputable that no one could be
bothered with him. Oliver should then have
been released, but instead he was led back
to his prison cell in Dublin. The Protestant
Bishop of Meath, an ex-Cromwellian,
consulted with Lord Shaftsbury and they
decided to switch the trial venue to London.
The Primate was accordingly taken on
board ship in the company of two guards,
and they set sail for England on 21 October.
He was imprisoned in the Common Side
Felons in Newgate and kept in solitary
confinement for another six months. He
was not even allowed to see James McKenna,
his faithful servant, who had loyally
accompanied his master to London. James
too, was clapped into Newgate in solitary
confinement for no reason except that he
was a Catholic.
Newgate Prison was such a filthy place
that contemporaries referred to it with
disgust: "stinking" was their politest word
for it. The solitary confinement cells were
nine feet by nine by six, with a small
window, doubly grated, high up in the
exterior wall. The ventillation of the entire
structure was defective so that airlessness
was added to the punishment. The walls of
the cells were delapidated; the whole
The Martyrdom Of Saint Oliver Plunkett
From a painting in the Synod Half, Armagh.
building was infested with rats. There was
no sanitation and the prisoners had no
facilities for washing themselves. Cleaning
system, sickroom-even the simple matter
of prison inspection-were not even dreamt
of at that time; improvements of such kind
were still almost a hundred years away. In
the Newgate of Oliver's time, the beds were
no more than piles of dirty straw; the
prisoners wore shackles, called "irons" or
"sheers", varying in weight from twelve to
forty pounds. These had to be paid for by
the prisoner, the lightest being the most
expensive. Prisons in effect were run as
profit-making institutions for the Keeper
and warders, a system that gave rise to
unlimited abuse.
On the evening of 3 May, Oliver was
allowed to have a visit from James
McKenna; the Keeper, Captain Richardson,
was present. James McKenna had at this
time been the Archbishop's personal servant
for eleven years; serving his Mass, riding
with him on visitations, taking care of his
clothes, cooking his food, doing his
messages and, during periods of persecution,
sharing the risks of flight and concealment.
It was well known that he was prepared to
die for his master.
The Court had allowed Oliver five weeks
to get his defence witnesses over from
Ireland. A kinsman, John Plunkett, was
standing by to help. But John did not know
the main roads and by-roads of the Armagh
province. McKenna would have to go with
him to guide him by the shortest route. The
time permitted, five weeks, was derisive in
its insufficiency. Messengers were dependent
upon a sailing vessel, which was in turn
dependent on a favouring wind. It was an
accepted hazard of this journey to be
detained at the port for two weeks, or
more, waiting for the wind to blow in the
right direction. The messengers, in this
case, were to bring at least eight witnesses
for the Primate's defence; also to collect
testified copies of the records of conviction
against the witnesses for the prosecution. If
these papers were produced in Court, they
would shake the credibility of the men who
were testifying against the Archbishop.
When the Primate was brought under
guard from Newgate Prison to Westminster
Hall, the streets were thronged with an
excited rabble who had come out to jeer at
the prisoner and make it clear they wanted
a verdict of guilty. The greatest crowd was
congregated menacingly around the entrance
to the Hall. They made it as
unpleasant as they could for the prisoner as
he was hustled from a closed hackney
carriage to the dock.
Shaftesbury's agents had rounded up
eight witnesses for the Crown: Florence
MacMoyer, an expelled Franciscan,
Murphy, an excommunicated secular priest
and others-many of them jail-birds and all,
it was to be hoped, perjurers. Oliver said
that they were "friars, whom I have
endeavoured to correct for seven years,
renegades from our religion, and dastard
apostates." No counsel for defence was
allowed to a prisoner accused of treason.
But the dice was loaded in any case. There
is even a doubt whether this English court
had jurisdiction over the Irishman. The trial
was conducted with only the merest
semblance of justice. The result was as
foreseen: the jury found the accused guilty of
High Treason, the words having been put
into their mouths by the Lord Chief Justice.
Plunkett protested against the whole
affair. "I am come here where no jury
knows me nor the quality of my adversaries.
If I had been in Ireland, I would have put
myself upon my trial tomorrow, without
any witnesses, before any Protestant jury
that knew both them and me." He referred
to the distance (some five hundred miles)
between London and Ireland. "your Lordship
sees how I am dealt with, I have not
time to bring my witnesses or my records ...
I am brought out of my native land where
these men and I live, and where my
witnesses and records are." His objections
were swept aside; the Bench had no ears
for such things. To the verdict of guilty,
Oliver answered simply: "Deo gratias."
A week elapsed before final judgement
was given. Oliver had time to prepare a
speech exposing the worthlessness of the
evidence and proofs of his innocence in the
so-called Plot. He took care to quote various
Irish Viceroys to prove his continuous
loyalty to King Charles. There was no
answer to this line of argument. It could not
be den1onstrated that he was a traitor no
nutter how the imagination was stretched;
the Popish Plot fantasy of a foreign invasion
was impossible to sustain. So the Lord Chief
Justice changed his tactics by describing
Oliver's Faith and the work he did to
pron1ote it as the greatest treason of all!
"Yours is treason of the highest nature, it
is treason in truth against God and your
King and the country where you lived. You
have done as much as you could to dishonour
God in this case, for the bottom of
your treason was your setting up your false
religion, than which there is not anything
n1ore displeasing to God, or more pernicious
to mankind in the world-a religion that is
ten times worse than all heathenish superstitions,
the most dishonourable and
derogatory to God and His glory of all
religions or pretended religions whatever ...
So that certainly a greater crime there
cannot be committed against God than for
a man to endeavour the propagation of that
religion.''
In other words, Lord Chief Justice
Pemberton, could not have made it clearer
that Oliver was not a political intriguer but
a committed Catholic. Then having gone
through the formality of inviting the
prisoner to apostatise, he delivered the
customary sentence: he was to be hanged,
drawn, quartered and disembowelled.
During the last two weeks of his life, the
Archbishop was allowed to meet Dom
Maurus Corker, a fellow prisoner. The long
solitude of his first nine months in the
prison was at last relieved. He was permitted
to receive visitors and he wrote his last
letters. These letters, affectionate and brave
give a valuable record of the man's
character. He was, of course, aware of the
kind of death that lay before him, every
detail of the horrors to come was before his
inner eyes. And yet he could write:
"Compared to the death of the Cross, that
of Ty burn, as I hear the description of it, is
but a flea-bite."
A great consolation was that he was
allowed to say Mass daily for the last week
of his life. This privilege was arranged for
him by Dom Maurus, who was in touch
with influential Catholic friends outside the
prison. Towards the end, so many well-wishing
English Catholics came to see the
Archbishop-bringing along children for
his blessing-that he had difficulty finding
enough time to compose his final speech.
On the appointed day, 12 July, 1681, he
was drawn on a hurdle behind a horse from
Newgate to Tyburn, a distance of about
two miles. The route was lined by
thousands of hostile people. From the
scaffold, Oliver protested his innocence of
treason to the huge crowd present, and
declared his loyalty to the King, praying
for him and his family, praying also for his
own enemies. He ended his sixteen minute
speech by asking forgiveness of all whom
he had offended in thought, word or deed.
He made an Act of Contrition aloud and
asked for the intercession of Our Blessed
Lady and all the holy angels and saints. He
then recited the Fiftieth Psalm. "Have
mercy on me, O God, according to Thy
great mercy. And according to the
multitude of Thy tender mercies, blot out
my iniquity."
He was dead before he was cut down
from the scaffold. A hush fell over the
enormous crowd which might justly be
interpreted as reverence for the man and a
growing suspicion of the falsity of the
Popish Plot. The Archbishop was its last
victim. From the moment of his death, his
remains and personal effects were treasured
as the relics of a saint.
