I determined to try how many men in Ireland would help me to lay the axe to the root of this
rotten and hideous Irish landlordism; that we might see how much would come down along with it.
-John Mitchel, The United Irishman, 20 May, 1848.
The conquest of Ireland is the story
of the confiscation of its land, the
dispossession of its people, and their
subsequent attempts, usually by rebellion,
to recover the land and resources of the
country for themselves. In this view of
history, economic factors have played a far
greater role in the conquest of Ireland than
religious, political or strategic ones, regardless
of the reasons advanced at any particular
time to mount an invasion or suppress a
rebellion.
The twelfth century Anglo-Norman
invasion was the first effort at confiscation.
Two hundred years later Norman barons
owned two-thirds of the land of Ireland and
Norman feudal law and institutions ruled
the Pale, the part of the east coast centred on
Dublin where the king's writ ran. In the
next two centuries, the Gaelic clans whittled
away at this territory and recovered most
of it.
Henry VIII, in the sixteenth century,
declared himself "King of Ireland", his
daughter Mary confiscated the clan
territories of the O'Connors and the
O'Moores in Leix and Offaly, planting
them with English Catholic settlers. The
native Irish were permitted to hold one-third
of the land; the plantation collapsed
when they rebelled and the settlers fled.
Elizabeth, Mary's sister and successor,
ordered the plantation of the entire province
of Munster. The settlers had to be English
and Protestant and no Irish were permitted
to hold land. Among the planters were the
poet, Edmund Spenser, and Sir Walter
Raleigh. It was difficult to induce Englishmen
to settle in Munster, a most unsafe
place in the last quarter of the sixteenth
century. This English colony was swept
away in the usual fashion-by an Irish
rebellion. Before that happened, however,
Raleigh managed to accumulate some
42,000 choice acres, which Richard Boyle
purchased in 1602 after the battle of
Kinsale. Boyle went on to become the first
Earl of Cork and one of the largest landowners
in Ireland. [note: Karl S. Bottigheimer, English Money and Irish Land (Oxford: At the Clarendon Press, 1971), pp. 6-13.]
(He was also father of
the scientist, Robert Boyle).
Spenser claimed the Munster plantation
failed because the English were not
sufficiently bloody-minded: they should
have "rooted out" the natives and established
strong military garrisons to protect
the settlers. [note: Ibid., p. 13. The author quotes from Spenser's Brief Note on Ireland written in 1598.] And he urged that this be done
for future colonies.
His advice was followed a few years
later in Ulster. After the defeat of Hugh
O'Neill, the Great Earl of Tyrone, and his
Spanish allies at Kinsale, English power had
Ulster at its mercy. The O'Neills had ruled
this most Gaelic of the Irish provinces for a
thousand years. When harassment drove
O'Neill and his fellow-chiefs to the
Continent in 1607, their lands were declared
forfeit. The colonization of Ulster was
planned by the King's Lord Deputy in
Ireland, Sir Arthur Chichester, and the
King's Lord Chancellor, Sir Francis Bacon.[note: Richard Bagwell, Ireland Under the Stuarts (London: Longmans Green & Co., 1916) p. 66, Vol. I. Also Sir Thomas
Philips, Londonderry and the London Companies (Belfast: H.M. Stationery Office, 1928), pp. 13-16.]
The settlers were English Protestants and
Scotch Presbyterians.
During O'Neill's rebellion the City of
London had lent Elizabeth money for her
Irish wars. Now the City received from
King James I, all of O'Neill's lands in what
was called the County of Coleraine and is
now Derry. It also had Church rights in the
territory and fishing rights in the Foyle and
Bann. (Lough Neagh, apparently, was
included but Chichester double crossed the
city and held its fishing rights for himself
and his descendants). [note: Charles Dickson, Revolt in the North (Dublin : Clomnore & Reynolds, 1960), pp. 35-6.]
The use of merchant
capital for colonization has a ring of modern
imperialism, a Marxist would say: excess
savings chasing higher profits overseas,
while the home government creates the
political conditions for the venture and
protects it subsequently.[note: Bottigheimer, English Money and Irish Land, pp. 20-1.] "The financial
burden was distributed among the City's
major companies, the companies determining
for themselves how to raise the
necessary funds for their membership" .[note: Ibid., p. 21. The author notes the following twelve London companies and the amounts, in pounds, each paid to the
Plantation of Ulster: Merchant Tailors (3,885), Grocers (3,873), Haberdashers (3,124), Goldsmiths (2,999), Mercers (2,680),
Drapers (3,072), Fishmongers (2,260), Clothworkers (2,260), Skinners (1,963), Salters (1,954), Vintners (2,080),
Ironmongers (1,514).]
The City of London established the Irish
Society to oversee the plantation. Professor
T. W. Moody of Trinity College, Dublin,
says it differed from similar colonizing
companies of the day-such as the Virginia,
Somers Island, Massachusetts Bay and
Providence Companies-in that "it was
initiated by the Crown as a means of
carrying out part of its programme for the
Anglicization of Ulster and was foisted on
the City as the most capable body for that
purpose," while the other companies
although "encouraged by the Crown, were
promoted by private individuals for motives
of profit, and the capital was voluntarily
subscribed". [note: Ibid., p. 22, quoting T . W. Moody's The Londonderry Plantation, 1609-1641, Belfast, 1939, p. 33.]
The City of London plantation was
attacked during the Star Chamber proceedings
of the 1630s for failure to plant its
territory with Protestants; it was fined
£70,000 and lost its Charter. During its
tenure, the City carried out one part of its
contract, to fortify the towns of Derry and
Coleraine. These stood the test of rebellion
and history and have attained great significance
in the mythology of Protestant
Ulster.
The Plantation of Ulster covered the
counties of Armagh, Tyrone, Cavan,
Donegal, Fermanagh as well as Coleraine.
Scottish groups independently settled
Antrim and Down and these became the
heart of Protestant Ulster. Other plantations
followed in Longford, Leitrim and
Wexford. Plans of plantations envisaged
for the entire island were interrupted by the
Rebellion of 1641 which ushered in a ten-year
war ending with the Cromwellian
settlement.
Here is one modern student's view of
these plantations:
Although the respective plantations
since the mid-sixteenth century had
differing effects upon their particular
localities, the plantation phenomenon had
certain common consequences. It established
in Ireland a new element in the
population distinguished from the old by
its novelty, its Protestantism, and its
Englishness. Its very presence introduced
yet another, religious excuse for
confiscation of Irish land. This is not to
suggest that the New English were
purposely placed in Ireland as bait to a
trap, but that they sometimes inadvertently
and sometimes consciously
performed such a function. The rebellion
of 1641 was the first in which crimes
against Protestants as such received any
great publicity, and the moral energy of
the Cromwellian conquest derived less
from the act of rebellion (which after all
was directed against the same monarch
as the English rebellion) than from a
desire to revenge Protestant sufferings.
Thus the new colonial class, though not
great in numbers, provided what was in
effect the thin end of a wedge. They were
a potential cause celebre and an active
political lobby for further expansion of
English interests in Ireland.[note: Ibid., p. 27.]
Cromwell landed in Ireland in mid-August
1649 and in nine months subjugated
most of the country by deeds that made
"the curse of Cromwell" the worst fate one
could wish on an enemy in the Irish
language and which survives as a malediction
still. It took two more years after
his departure to destroy the last of the Irish
rebels-called Tories, curiously enough still
conducting guerilla forays against the
English garrisons. The Cromwellian
Settlement of Ireland followed. Its purpose:
the "total reducement and settlement of
that nation ... ". [note: Ibid., p. 116.]
Those adventurers who had advanced
money to suppress the Irish rebellion were
repaid in Irish land. The English officers and
soldiers who had fought in Ireland received
their arrears of pay in Irish land. The Irish
themselves paid the cost of their conquest.
Some of the soldiers sold their shares to
speculators. The surgeon-general of
Cromwell's forces in Ireland, Sir William
Petty, made a survey of the country for the
English government in the mid-1650s and
disclosed that ll,000,000 of Ireland's
20,000,000 acres had been confiscated. [note: Ibid., pp. 139-40.]
(Petty estimated that the long war had
reduced the population from l,466,000 in
1641 to 616,000 in 1652).[note: Thomas L. Coonan, The Irish Catholic Confederacy and the Puritan Revolution (Dublin: Clonmore & Reynolds, 1954), P. 327.]
After the
Restoration some 7,500 ex-Cromwellian
officers and soldiers and 500 adventurers
had their titles to Irish estates confirmed by
Charles II. [note: Bottigheimer, English Money and Irish Land, p. 140.] Here is the origin of the Anglo-Irish
Protestant Ascendancy, the landlord
class of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, which with the settler population
of Ulster, formed the colonial interest in
Ireland.
The Irish who fought English forces in
Ireland during those years were banished
from the country. Irish gentry who
received pardons from the new government
were transplanted to Connacht ("to Hell or
to Connacht"), the poorest of the provinces.
The Act of Settlement said it was "not the
intention of Parliament to extirpate this
whole nation" and exempted "all husbandmen,
ploughmen, laborers, artificers and
others of the inferior sort" [note: Coonan, Confederacy, p. 324.]
from banishment.
The new landlords needed labour.
It thus eventuated that the most
disastrous long term result of the
Cromwellian Settlement was the creation
of a mushroom aristocracy of Protestant
English landlords flanked by a solidly
Catholic peasantry, with which they
were utterly out of sympathy. It would
be impossible to list the long train of
social and economic ills that followed in
the wake of this problem. Technically the
peasants were tenants-at-will to their
lords, a status which precluded progress
or independence. Actually their position
more closely resembled that of medieval
serfs; but since there was no bond of
religion to bind them to their lords, they
were treated as soulless hewers of wood
and drawers of water. Differences of
language and national outlook aggravated
the gap. The lord regarded the peasant as
an alien in his native land who was
killable only, if the laws of "the dismal
science" of economics had not otherwise
ordained. The peasant regarded the lord
as a usurper, a parasite, and a sensuous
epicure. [note: Ibid., p. 325.]
The historian W. E. H. Lecky in his
monumental History of Ireland in the
Eighteenth Century says much the same
thing:
The Cromwellian Settlement is the
foundation of that deep and lasting
division between the proprietary and the
tenants which is the chief cause of the
political and social evils in Ireland. [note: W. E. H. Lecky, History of Ireland in the Eighteenth Century (London: Longmans Green & Co., 1913), p. 106, Vol. IX.]
When James II was kicked off his throne
in the "Glorious Revolution", the Irish
gentry who were still around despite
Cromwell's Act of Settlement made a last
desperate attempt to turn the clock back by
backing the deposed monarch against his
daughter Mary and her husband William.
One consequence of this was a Parliament
in Dublin which cancelled Charles II's
confirmation of the Act of Settlement.
Naturally this insured that the Protestants
of Ireland would back William against
James, because as J. P. Mahaffy of Trinity
College noted in his introduction to
Revolutionary Ireland and its Settlement [note: Robert H. Murray, Revolutionary Ireland and Its Settlement (London : Macmillan & Co., 1911), Introduction by J. P. Mahaffy, p. xix.]
"the Cromwellian settlers were the backbone
of the English interest in Ireland .. .
along with the older Ulster planters ... ".
And yet, as Mahaffy also noted, to reverse
the Act of Settlement and undo "the most
signal injustice" to old Catholic landlords
who had not participated in the rebellion
of 1641 was "an act of tardy retributive
injustice." Whatever the reason, the
Protestants of Ulster saw William as their
saviour; the successful defence of Derry
against James's army probably won Ireland
for William. Thereafter the Williamite - and
Protestant-progress could not be
stopped at the Boyne, at Aughrim, or at
Limerick where James's Irish army
surrendered. Lecky writes:
When the l8th century dawned, the
great majority of the former leaders of
the people were either sunk in abject
poverty or scattered as exiles over
Europe. The last spasm of resistance had
ceased, and the long period of unbroken
Protestant ascendancy had begun.[note: Lecky, Ireland, pp. 134-5.]
In l848 the landlord class still controlled
much of the economic and political life of
Ireland, although the worst features of the
system had been eliminated since the
eighteenth century when a Samuel Johnson
could say:
The Irish are in a most unnatural state,
for we see there the minority prevailing
over the majority. There is no instance,
even in the Ten Persecutions, of such
severity as that which the Protestants of
Ireland have exercised against the
Catholics. [note: Ibid., p. 170. From. Boswell's Life of Johnson, c. xxix.]
By "Protestants" he meant of course the
Ascendancy, the landlord class.
It remained true, however, as Mitchel
and other observers asserted, that landlordism
was at the root of Irish discontent and
was responsible in large part for the
country's worst evils, including the Famine.
Half of the landlords were absentees; they
leased out great tracts to middlemen who
exacted the highest rents the tenants could
pay. Lecky's description of the system was
true for l848:
The whole economical fabric had come
to depend on the continuation of high
prices and high rents, and no people in
Europe were less fitted than the Irish to
adapt themselves to changed circumstances
or were placed under circumstances
more unfavourable. There was an
absentee aristocracy. There was a poor
and extravagant gentry. There was a
pauper, improvident, utterly ignorant
peasantry depending for their whole
subsistence on the cultivation of the soil.
A hierarchy of idle middlemen stood
between them and the real owner. The
system existed over nearly the whole of
Ireland, and in some parts there were as
many as six or seven middlemen between
the proprietor of the fee and the actual
occupier. All these had to derive their
profit from the soil, and the extreme
competition for land in a rapidly growing
population had forced up its rent far
beyond its intrinsic value.[note: W . E. H. Lecky, Leaders of Public Opinion in Ireland (London: Longmans Green & Co., 1903), pp. 43-4, Vol. 2.]
The actual cultivator of the soil existed
on a diet of "potatoes and water with a little
salt," according to Lecky who was by no
means over sympathetic to the Irish poor.
Along the coast they might supplement this
ration with fish. There was a period every
year between the coming in of the new
potatoes and the end of the old year's stock,
when the families of labourers and cottiers
went hungry. "Vast multitudes lived by
migratory begging," Lecky said. [note: Ibid., p. 44.]
The poor lived in mud cabins without
furniture and often without windows or
chimneys. They slept on straw thrown on
the dirt floor. The whole family huddled
together for warmth in the winter months.
Famines were frequent. Before the Great
Famine (1845-48) the worst was in 1822;
less severe famines occurred in 183l, l835,
1836 and 1837. Many labourers were paid
in kind. The Devon Commission, which
was nude up entirely of landlords and
nude its report on the state of Ireland just
on the eve of the Great Famine, noted:
In the counties of Antrim, Down,
Londonderry, Tyrone and Carlow, the
most general rate of daily wages appeared
to be ten pence a day in winter, and one
shilling in summer. In Donegal,
Fermanagh, Monaghan, Kildare,
Kilkenny, King's County, Louth, Meath,
Queen's County, Westmeath, Wexford
and Wicklow, eight pence in winter and
ten pence in summer; and in all the other
counties, except Dublin, where one
shilling per day was usually paid, the
general daily pay seemed to be eight
pence. [note: Lord Edmond Fitzmaurice and James R. Thursfield, Two Centuries of Irish History (London: 1888), pp. 475-6.]
Outside of Ulster, "there was hardly anything
corresponding to the English middle
class". [note: Lecky, Leaders, pp. 44-5.]
according to Lecky, and-again
outside of Ulster-no industry. With farm
wages at subsistence levels and no settled
employment, the labourer depended on his
potato plot for food-thus leading to
greater subdivision of land.
From Elizabeth's time, England had Poor
Law; Ireland had none until 1838. It was
introduced amid great opposition, particularly
from O'Connell's party. One hundred
and thirty workhouses were set up around
the country with one hundred and thirty
Boards of Guardians to administer them.
The local electoral district paid the cost. Its
test came with the Famine and it proved
inadequate. No occupier of n1ore than a
quarter-acre could get poor relief; the
alternative was to give up his holding. In
consequence, the Poor Law nude paupers,
beggars or emigrants of the cottiers and
labourers.
In 1848, Parliament compelled landlords
to give forty-eight hours notice of pending
evictions to Poor Law Guardians so that the
local workhouse could meet its obligations
to feed and shelter the new paupers.
The Famine did not affect the entire
country. The western regions from Kerry
to Donegal were demolished and the
economic base of the people destroyed.
Also badly hit were the rural populations of
South Ulster, Leitrim, Roscommon and
West Cork. East of this line, farmers paid
little heed to the Famine, although the
agricultural labourers suffered greatly.
Farmers in the fertile parts of Leinster and
in Northeast Ulster were unaffected. Since
Protestant Ulster to a great extent was
concentrated in the northeast the Famine
had little effect on it.
From its early days, the Ulster Protestant
colony was superior to the native Irish in
farming skills, according to Sir William
Petty. They exported butter and cheese and
built up a woollen industry. They also
forced their landlords to grant them rights
of tenure; this was called "Ulster custom",
since it did not have the force of law. The
tenants-at-will in the rest of Ireland vainly
tried to win a similar concession. Indeed the
application of "Ulster custom" to the whole
island was one of James Fintan Lalor's
reformist demands. When English laws
discriminated against the woollen industry,
Ulster Protestants turned to linen. In 1791
the first shipbuilding yard was built in
Belfast. In the nineteenth century linen and
shipbuilding became the two main industries
of Ulster after farming.
John Mitchel, the Ulster Protestant, was
convinced that a struggle against landlordism
would unite Ulster Protestants and
Catholic Irishmen in a movement which in
time would drive British power from
Ireland. It is difficult to say now how much
validity there was in this belief Some liberal
Ulster landlords such as Sharman Crawford,
were sympathetic to Repeal of the Union.
But the mass of Ulster Protestants believed
that Repeal would mean Catholic ascendancy.
Also, their standard of living was
much higher than in the rest of Ireland;
they supplemented their income by cottage
industry: nearly every farmer was a linen
weaver and his wife was a spinner. And
there always remained the great divide of
religion.
But Mitchel was right when he said the
Ulster Protestant farmer had no great love
for his landlord; some of them were as
bitterly anti-landlord as many small-holders
in the South and West of Ireland. All
wanted to legalize their "Ulster custom."
It may have been possible to build an
agrarian campaign uniting North and
South-as Gavan Duffy was to try two
years later-but to move from that into an
anti-British political campaign would
appear to be wishful thinking.
Mitchel, then thirty-three years of age,
casting around for some means to ignite a
social revolution, believed that the tenant
farmers North and South had enough in
common to unite them in a common cause,
one worth fighting for. He felt that Lalor's
theory could do this combined with the
vision of Wolfe Tone to unite "Catholic,
Protestant and Dissenter in the common
name of Irishman." Such an alliance would
be fatal to English rule.
Starting in April, Mitchel wrote a series
of letters in The United Irishman, " to the
Protestant farmers, labourers, and artisans
of the North of Ireland." The enemy of
Ireland, he told them, was "British
oligarchy", which prevented the destruction
of Irish landlordism. The English Parliament
and the English government would not
help the Protestants of Ulster: whatever
rights they had were won with arms in
their hands. And he suggested that the
Catholic farmers of the South were prepared
to follow their example.
(3)
Mitchel's first letter opened in grand
Carlylean prose in the April 22 issue of
The United Irishman:
Wherever public addresses have been
heretofore made to you as Protestants
they were always of one or other of these
two kinds-either they came from your
leaders, great landlords, Orange Grand
Masters and such like grandees, and dwelt
much on the enormities of "Romanism"
and the treacherous devices of "the Man
of Sin", and on the necessity of strenuously
resisting the plots of this same
"Man of Sin" (who would appear to have
some horrid designs upon you)-or else
those addresses came from some
"agitating" association or other of
O'Connell's that wanted your help, and
so called you gallant fellows, and your
fathers and grandfathers gallant fellows,
reminded you of the volunteering, and
asked you just to volunteer again and
follow them, the agitating associations.
Neither of these was exactly the thing
for you. The first showed too much zeal
for Protestantism and too little for
Tenant-Right, or any other right of the
poor. The second had always a certain air
of fawning blarney, besides a suspiciously
clerical aspect, that made you naturally
recoil. The first adviser, for all his paternal
language and anxiety about "our holy
religion", if you watched him closely,
had ejectments hid under his purple sash
and orange apron-the other, with his
liberalism and truly sincere admiration
for your ancestors, appeared too often
masquerading in a "holy coat of Treves"
or on his knees before the venerated
hierarchy. Neither of them quite met
your case.
For your case was and is just this-the
farmers are gradually, in Ulster as in
other provinces, losing hold of the soil,
under the pressure of poor rates, rents and
taxes, and becoming labourers; and the
labourers and artisans, are sinking
gradually into paupers, so that there is a
continual sliding scale sloping downward
to perdition. For every ruined farmer
there is one destitute labourer the more,
for every ejected cottier there is another
pauper on the rates, and the still increasing
rates weigh down faster and faster
continually more and more of those who
still struggle to earn their bread into the
class which has given up the effort in
despair, and thrown itself on the earnings
of other men.
Is this or is it not a true statement of
the case? And if it be, do you think it is
to be remedied by a vow to defend our
Protestant constitution in Church and
State? It seems to me precisely our
constitution in Church and State that
has brought us to this condition
-it certainly was not the Pope of Rome
-the Pope, we know, is the "Man of
Sin" and the "Antichrist", and also, if
you like, the "Mystery of Iniquity", and
all that, but he brings no ejectments in
Ireland. The Seven Sacraments are, to be
sure, very dangerous, but the quarter
acre clause touches you more nearly. In
short, our vicious system of government,
and especially the infamous land laws,
are the machinery that has brought you
to this pass, and, as the very Grand
Masters say nothing at all about mending
these, let them keep their "addresses of
loyalty" to themselves. [note: The United Irishman, April 22, 1848.]
What were the farmers of Ulster to do?
"Extermination is creeping northward,"
Mitchel warned. And he added:
We are told that the North is thriving,
because Belfast exports much linen, and
Derry sends off innumerable boxes of
eggs and cargoes of corn. How much of
the linen do you who weave it get to wear?
How much of the corn do you who sow
and reap it get to eat? Just think of this,
labourers and artisans of Ulster-Ireland
last year produced twice as much as
would feed all her inhabitants, not with
Indian meal, but with good Irish wheat,
oats and beef And think of this-there is
flax enough grown and linen cloth
enough woven, and wool enough shorn
in Ireland to muffle up every Irishman
comfortably, close buttoned to the chin.
Where does it go? Who eats and who
wears what you make? Who has a better
right to it than you? [note: Ibid.]
And what has all of this to do with "the
Protestant succession"? Mitchel wants to
know. This is a "free trade in human bodies
and souls." From the blood and sweat and
brain and marrow they take what is
marketable and the offal is left to the poor
houses or the fever hospital.
How this is done you shall hear. The
broad land of Ireland, which was given
to you by God, has been given by various
Kings and Queens of England to some
few thousand persons, who now claim
it as absolutely theirs, with the growth
upon it, and the minerals beneath it, and
the air above it ... But as you, the
"millions" and "masses" cannot live
without earth and air, these few thousand
persons, having a monopoly of the
articles, and finding that men will give
anything and do anything rather than die
of hunger, cry out-Free Trade! Fair
competition! No interference with
bargains! You see these men are willing
to sell us themselves for slaves, soul and
body, for so much land, and shall we not
purchase? Is it not fair supply and
demand?
Thus also capitalists, having by their
gigantic operations abolished all household
and homespun manufactures, and
having laws made to their hand by the
other conspirators-"the gentry " -enabling
them to combine, and forbidding
poor men to combine against them under
penalties, can wring out of the working
Classes (by the same enlightened system
of fair competition) their health and
strength and life-can take the pick and
choice of them-use them up and fling
them on a dunghill to die when they are
useless. [note: Ibid.]
Mitchel was describing the world of the
Industrial Revolution in the 1840s. As he
saw it, the only cure-in Ireland at any
rate-was "the total overthrow of the
aristocratic system of government and the
establishment of the People's inalienable
Sovereignty". [note: Ibid.]

As he had announced one month earlier
this could only take the form of a Republic,
the kind of Republic Wolfe Tone and the
United Irishmen had in mind. And so he
told the Protestants of Ulster:
We must have Ireland, not for certain
peers and nominees of peers in College
Green, but Ireland for The
Irish. I scorn and spit upon "Repeal of
the Union". The "Queen, Lords and
Commons of Ireland" will never be seen
in bodily form upon this earth. "The
golden link of the Crown" is as great a
humbug as the great Peace Principle of
the "mighty leader of the Irish people."
Oh! my countrymen, I would that I
could raise your thoughts to the height of
this great argument; that I could make
you know yourselves, and your powers
and destinies, your wrongs and your
rights. [note: Ibid.]
That was the end of the first letter. There
were four in all. The second made the point
that "Irish landlordism is maintained here
by the English connection, and the English
connection is perpetuated by Irish landlordism";
there was "no way to put an end to
either but by destroying both". [note: The United Irishman, April 29.]
In the third letter he noted that "religious
hatred has been kept alive in Ireland longer
than anywhere else in Christendom". The
reason was that Irish landlords and British
statesmen profited by this. " ... so soon as
Irish landlordism and British dominion are
finally rooted out of the country it will be
heard of no longer in Ireland any more than
it is in France or Belgium now" .[note: The United Irishman, May 13.]
And he took a line from Lalor about the
"people's sovereignty" extending over "the
land and sea and air of Ireland" and being
the possession of the people of Ireland:
"this is the gospel that the heavens and the
earth are preaching, and that all hearts are
secretly burning to embrace" .[note: Ibid.]
The final letter was written from
Newgate Prison and published in The
United Irishman of 20 May, 1848. [note: The United Irishman, May 20.]  Mitchel
looked back to the time when he had
believed in a union of classes; but no more.
He called it "an agreeable delusion". The
landlords of Ireland did not acknowledge
Ireland as their country; their interests were
British. "For them judges charge-for them
hangmen strangle".
And so he had decided "to lay the axe to
the root" of landlordism and "see how
much would come down along with it".
For this he had established The United
Irishman. Its message was that "the life of
one labouring man is exactly equal to the
life of one nobleman, neither more nor
less." He had also preached "that men born
in Ireland have a right to live on the
produce of Ireland-and even to make
laws for Ireland!" And he had taught:
"That no good thing could come from the
English Parliament or the English Government!
That all men ought to possess arms,
and know how to use them!" The consequence
was that such 'Jacobin premises"
outraged the gentry of Ireland. They
determined "to crush the rebel who dared
to say and write down (contrary to all the
statutes, and all the precedents, and all the
reported cases) that a poor man' s life is as
precious as a nobleman."
The pulpits of parish churches in Dublin
were used to denounce Jacobins, "meaning
me", said Mitchel. He was allowed to
preach his doctrines, however, until "I
began to call you, the Protestant democracy
of the North, to my aid." And then Dublin
Castle put him on trial and transported him
out of the country-indeed took him right
across the world to Van Dieman's Land.
The story of that journey is told in Mitchel's
Jail Journal.
But is it true that the British government
feared the union of Northern Protestants
and Irish Catholic peasants so much that
when Mitchel, the Ulster Presbyterian, put
the question openly and directly he was
immediately locked up?
Mitchel believed it did. He wrote:
I called aloud on you to come and help
me to abolish the system that gave away
the food you raised and the cloth you
wove, to be eaten and worn by strangers.
I asked you what profit or pride you had
in supporting foreign Queens and Princes
out of your hard earnings. I asked you
whether you liked paying high taxes in
order to fit out troops and ships to
disseminate British civilization in India,
and diffuse over China the blessings of
British "Christianity", which turned out,
when the bales were opened, to be
nothing but printed cottons. I implored
you to give over your terror about the
bugbear of Popery, and to join with your
countrymen in taking possession of
Ireland for the Irish: and you were
beginning to hearken to my appeal - when
government flesh and blood could
bear it no longer ... And, inasmuch as I
still persisted in speaking, writing,
printing and publishing the truth, I am
now inditing to you this letter-possibly
my last-in a cell of Newgate Gaol,
where I await what the blessed law and
my good or evil destiny may bring me.[note: Ibid.]
He believed his mission was accomplished.
"The game is afoot at last", he wrote
The liberty of Ireland may come
sooner or later, by peaceful negotiation
or bloody conflict-but it is sure; and
wherever between the poles I may
chance to be, I will hear the crash of the
downfall of the thrice-accused "British
Empire''. [note: Ibid.]
Mitchel was wrong in that, whatever
about the government's motives in trying
him for Treason-Felony-the first to be so
tried under the new Act, specially drafted
for people like him. Ireland did not gain
liberty and the British Empire did not fall.
Not then, anyway.
(4)
John Mitchel used the final weeks of his
political life-he never again took an open
part in Irish politics except at the very end
of his life when he returned from America
to run as an abstentionist for a seat in the
British House of Commons for Tipperary - to
draw his brethren in Ulster to the side of
Nationalist Ireland. Despite his claims,
probably justified on the grounds of
propaganda, there is no basis for believing
his appeals had any effect on the political
thinking of the Protestants of Ulster.
Mitchel's vision of a movement like the
United Irishmen had no hope of coming to
pass in the Ireland of 1848.
Although there were Protestant Repealers
in the South, the files of The United Irishman
reveal no such movement in the North.
The disabilities of the Presbyterians, in
particular in the matter of public representation
which had made them sympathetic
to the cause of Catholic emancipation fifty
years earlier, had been removed. Catholic
emancipation itself made the mass of
Protestants fearful of Catholic ascendancy
in an Ireland with its own parliament.
This last explained the rise of the Orange
Order. The lodges were founded in 1795
[UNREADABLE "to defend the privileges of the poorer
Protestants who formed a kind of plebeian
aristocracy in Ireland" .[note: Hereward Senior, Orangeism in Ireland and Britain 1795-1836, (London: Routeldge & Kegan Paul, 1966), p. 274.]
At first it
contended for influence with the United
Irishmen, a movement dedicated human
rights and the eradication of 
the direct antithesis of Orangeism. The
"Orange spirit" helped the British government
defeat the United Irishmen.
Anti-Catholic propaganda revived among
Northern Protestants that they
were bent on exterminating. As one
Protestant historian put it: '
Better, thought they,
landlords, who took on in their
property than by the
demanded both their fa •
lives. Better Episcopacy, ' ·
only payment of tithes,
which threw children int
Accordingly the reaction
powerful. The sons of m c1
pikes at Ballynahinch to <
rector and the landlord, i ;
human
ms1nl.
The
~overn-
. Anti-
1mong
e Irish
As one
)v the
~ · t heir
who
their
xacted
Papery
flames.
ift and
·arried
w th e]
Orange Society which supported both
landlord and Episcopacy.[note: Dickson, Revolt, p. 235. From W. T. Latimer, A History of the Irish Presbyterians. p. 401.]
Orangeism was therefore, a powerful
counter-revolutionary force in Ireland and
there was little Mitchel could do about that.
The middle class of Ulster had formed
the core of the United Irishmen. For
demanding "equality of representation
without distinction of religion" , [note: Ibid. p. 86. Samuel Neilson, fought under of the United Irishmen, in evidence, August 9, 1798.]
in the
1790s, they had been driven into rebellion.
Most of them were more concerned with
"the rights of man" than with national
rights. They were republicans like their
counterparts who created the American
Revolution, because British mercantilism
was strangling their industries. Like the
American colonists they wanted to end
restrictions on trade, commerce and manufacture.
"The obvious and simple system of
natural liberty," of which Adam Smith
wrote, made as much sense in Ireland as in
the American colonies. And because of that,
the middle class of Belfast had a high proportion
of rebels in 1790.
Nearly sixty years later, the middle class
of Ulster had decided that the union with
Britain, which their fathers and grandfathers so bitterly opposed, was good for
business. As Eric Strauss puts it:
Industrial Ulster was linked to Great
Britain by vital material interests which
made any idea of repealing the Union,
with the chance of customs barriers
between the two countries always in the
[UNREADABLE·-kground, anathen t r t 1 c Ulsterman,
;le in the South tl11 , · pro tection
;lJ supenor } " l 1petition
~nc d in the co ur ~ ·._, f t illl i... thl: dignity
in d isputable axiom.3 7 [note: Eric Strauss, Irish Nationalism and British Democracy (New York: Columbia University Press, 1951), p. 76.]

(5)
Mitchel · h ad come to accept with Lalor
that be e ~ ·s·. of the appalling tragedy of the
Famine, · ·iciety in Ireland stood dissolved.
As one \, o believed in action he accepted
l" Ot 01 L :!or's analysis but his solution:
· « ci ; o n of landlordism and the link]
with Britain. His task, as he saw it in the
spring of 1848, was to bring about an armed
insurrection.
In the beginning he tried to reach the
smallholders and labourers of the South
with what he called his economic
question." In the fourth issue of The
United Irishman, he wrote:
It is not that Ireland does not produce
enough to sustain all her peoples; it is not
that you do not raise, with your own
hands, far more than enough to support
you and your families. It is because-and
only because-out of your harvests and
haggards the English claim a tribute, the
State claims taxes, and the landlords
claim rent-all enormous in amount, and
all prior to your claim for subsistence.
You must pay them all before you touch
a grain: they have "law" for it. [note: The United Irishman, March, 4.] 
The plain remedy for the Famine, he
said at another point, was "to take and keep,
out of the crops you raise, your own
subsistence and that of your families and
labourers." He spelled it out:
First, to part with none until you are
sure of your own living-to combine
with your neighbours that they may do
the like, and back you in your determination-
and to resist, in whatever way may
be needful, all claims whatsoever, legal
or illegal, till your own claims are
satisfied. If it needs all your crop to keep
you alive, you will be justified in refusing
and resisting payment of any rent,
tribute, rates or taxes whatever. This is
the true doctrine of Political Economy. [note: Ibid.]
The tenant farmers of Ulster, Mitchel
declared, had been established by "Protestants
with arms in their hands", as a witness
told the Devon Commission. Mitchel dryly
observed that the existence of this right in
Ulster could be ascribed not to the
Protestantism of the tenants but to their
arms. He suggested that the Catholic
tenant-farmers do likewise.
There is much radical, socialist-sounding
rhetoric in Mitchel's The United Irishman .
Mitchel really had no social theory other
than what he appropriated from Lalor. He
believed in social equality and political
democracy in the spring of 1848, whatever
about later. He advocated a war of classes:
of the poor against the rich, the peasantry
against the gentry, the one million small
farmers against the 8,000 landlords. With
Socialism, from what he understood of it,
he had no sympathy, as Jail Journal clearly
shows. His most abiding emotion was
hatred of British rule. That stayed with him
to the end.
Mitchel's aim was agrarian revolution,
but those who read The United Irishman
were townsmen of the middle class. His
calls to the small farmers and labourers
north and south were unknown to those
to whom they were addressed and went
unheeded.
The Whigs, whom he reviled, listened
closely to Mitchel's calls for revolution and
acted when they thought the time was ripe.
But there is no reason to believe that
Mitchel's presence in Ireland when the
rebellion broke out in July, 1848, would
have made any difference.
Although Mitchel became the prophet of
physical force in Irish politics and a father
figure of the twentieth century Sinn Fein
movement, his views changed substantially
regarding insurrection: he concluded that
rebellion was possible in Ireland only when
England was engaged in a major war.
Apart from Wolfe Tone, Mitchel was the
only political leader in Ireland, constitutional
or revolutionary, who truly understood the
special relationship of Protestant Ulster to
the Irish nation and appealed directly to
his brethren to join their Catholic fellow-countrymen
in forming a non-sectarian
Irish Republic. He was a voice in the
wilderness; although his words still draw
some echoes, the Protestants of Ulster have
yet to accept any part of Mitchel's political
philosophy. And his claims as an apostle of
liberty are undermined, to put it no
stronger, by his advocacy of slavery in
America.
And yet there is more to Mitchel than
that. One of the most moving passages in
Jail Journal is on the plight of the African
slave. Mitchel, a conservative, became a
revolutionary because of the Famine which
he saw as an act of man rather than an act
of God. His significance for Ireland is
confined to the spring of 1848 when he
tried to spark a revolution and failed.
Mitchel was a very ill man when he
returned to Ireland in March 1875 to fight
a new election after being unseated for
Tipperary as a convicted felon. He won
again, but died a few days later in Newry,
uncompromising to the last.

