Many present day issues in Irish education have deep roots. Questions now
being debated which relate to the
complexities of school ownership and control,
the involvement of the various churches in
education and the place of religious education
and instruction within the school curriculum,
have all been very real areas of concern in the
past. These issues as they exist today, are not
merely the replaying of old themes or the
tedious reworking of tired soil. They are in
many respects the continuing chapters in a tale
which has yet to be completed. A historian's
task, when faced with such issues, is to evaluate
and clarify, and without being ruthlessly pragmatic
about his function. He can sometimes
contribute to the current debate by giving
some account of how the various issues originated
and evolved. In examining the issues it can
be seen that above all else education is about
values and about the transmission of those
values and the history of education in Ireland
shows that education is also about power and
about the way in which various groups of interests
have used their power to have certain
ideologies transmitted.
One such issue has been that of proselytizing
and a survey of its occurrence does much to
substantiate the above generalisation. Proselytizing
can be defined in its application to Irish
education as those movements which were
designed to cause conversion from the Catholic
church to one or other of the Protestant
churches, schooling being the agent of conversion.
If the period from the reformation to
the mid nineteenth century is surveyed it can
be seen that the history of proselytizing schools
can be divided into three main phases. The first
phase existed when successive Tudor and Stuart
administrations had the conversion and conformity
of the Catholic population to Anglicanism
as a central aim. During that period conformity
was a matter of state policy and individual
anglicans who wished to be the agents of conversion
were such, as instruments of the state.
During the eighteenth century direct state
involvement in proselytism lessened and the
organising and funding of schools with proselytizing
as an aim was generally in the hands of
private individuals and voluntary groups who
could, nevertheless, depend to some extent on
state funding. In the closing years of the eighteenth century and the early decades of the nineteenth
century, proselytizing entered a third
phase during which it came to depend almost
entirely on private donations. The trend of lessening
state involvement continued and led
ultimately to a situation where not only was
state support for proselytizing not forthcoming,
but the government was to embark on a policy
of actively discouraging the movement.
Proselytizing Under The Tudors And The
Stuarts
The existence of two distinct cultural groups
within the island had always presented problems
for the Anglo-Norman and English administrations,
- one aspect of the issue being that
which related to questions of cultural transmission
and diffusion. In the fourteenth century,
the possible assimilation of the colony
into the cultural world of the native Irish
people resulted in the laws which were passed
at the Kilkenny Parliament of 1366, designed
to prevent the settlers from adopting the language,
customs and dress of the native Irish.
Later Poynings was to grapple with the problem
of maintaining a unified cultural outlook
among the settlers, but he had to admit defeat
for his policy of apartheid. Cultural assimilation
seemed to be taking place despite the best
intentions of the administration. The issue
changed somewhat during the reign of Henry
VIII. Prior to his reign the aim of successive
governments had been apartheid, since that was
seen as the most expedient way of ensuring the
separateness and loyalty of the colony: contact
might lead to conspiracy. With the growth of
royal power and the weakening of powerful
native and settler families, Henry felt confident
enough to develop a policy which had been
initiated by his father. Now an attempt would
be made to create one community rather than
building barriers between the two which lived
uneasily side by side. The end result, it was
hoped, would be a strong unified nation, bound
in subjection to the King and conforming to his
laws and rule. The task for the administration
then, was one of effecting conformity and
obedience among two groups and its task
became exceedingly difficult when Henry
rejected papal supremacy. This action presented
both the Anglo-Irish and the Gaelic population
with an acute dilemma: they might for various
expedient reasons wish to conform to royal
demands in temporal affairs, but could this be
reconciled with their traditional loyalty to
Rome?
Despite the remarkable increase in royal
power during the early years of the sixteenth
century much of the new legislation was over
optimistic and it reflected what might be the
case rather than what actually was. It could be
introduced within the pale with a reasonable
chance of success but its application in the
Gaelic marcher states would have to await the
extension of royal control over those areas.
Post reformation legislation reflected in tone,
the view that civil strife would result among the
King's Irish subjects from 'the diversitie that is
betwixt them in tongue, language, order and
habit'. Royal advisers considered that much
could be done to ease such a situation with an
effective and extensive system of schooling.
Consequently an act of 1537 proposed a system
of parochial schools. If successful, these schools
would result in the 'induction of a rude and
ignorant people to the knowledge of almighty
God, and of the good and virtuous obedience
which by His most holy precepts and commandments
they owe to their princes and superiors
... ' In content and in spirit the act reflected
the anxieties and hopes of the administration.
Conformity in religion was considered as
necessary for the effective ruling of the state as
was conformity in politics. Indeed both were
synonomous during the Tudor period and the
centuries following on the reformation can be
viewed as a period during which Irish Catholics
made successive attempts to separate their
political and religious allegiences and to have
that distinction accepted by the government.
The legislation of 1537 owed much of its
inspiration to ideas then current in England.
There, administrators and civil servants had to
deal with problems quite similar to those being
dealt with in Ireland. One man who had to
tackle the problem in his capacity of advisor
to Henry was Richard Morison, a man who
achieved prominence as a member of Cardinal
Wolsey's household and later as a top civil
servant under Cromwell. He was quite clear in
his mind that education could play an effective
role in unifying society and that it could be an
effective instrument of social control. He reflected
on the turmoil besetting England as it
moved through the first phases of the reformation;
to him the roots of rebellious activity
could be found in "evil education" which was
"a great cause of these and other mischiefs that
grow in a common weal". He called for adequate
education for all sections of society and
suggested that a firm instruction in a common
religion would secure unity of outlook and
purpose among the diverse factions within the
country. Attitudes towards the dissemination
of scripture were revolutionised by the reformation
and we find English prelates urging
their priests to teach and instruct the children
of their parishes in scripture and to read English
"so that thereby they may better learn how to
believe , how to pray , and how to live to God's
pleasure". [note: ibid, p.174.] Building on this, the act of 1537
stated that those taking orders outside the pale
were to take an oath to learn English and to
preach in English and on taking up their appointments
as priests they were required to keep
a school within their vicarage or rectory.
Diocesan schools as proposed in Elizabeth's
parliament of 1570 were intended as a development
and extension of the ideas embodied in
the parochial school legislation of 1537. These
schools under the control of the Anglican
bishop, had to employ an Englishman as master
and derive their support from church funds.
Like the parochial schools, the diocesan
schools were under a financial handicap which
prevented them from functioning effectively.
The Dublin administration, always hard pressed
for funds, was not as enthusiastic as the
London Government seemed to be about novel
schemes of social control and it shared the
resentment of the diocesan clergy towards the
demands placed on it. This led to a more satisfactory
scheme of finance being found for the
network of grammar schools founded during
the reigns of James I and Charles I. Under the
scheme for the plantation of Ulster James had
sanctioned the setting aside of land for 'royal
free schools' in each of the planted counties,
Armagh, Cavan, Derry, Donegal, Fermanagh
and Tyrone. In 1629, further schools were
established at Banagher in Offaly and Carysfort
in Wicklow and three years later saw the setting
up of a school at Clogher in Tyrone [note: Michael Quane, 'The diocesan schools - 1570-1870' in Journal of the Cork Historical and Archaeological
Society, 2 ser, lxvi (Jan-June, 1961) contains some very useful information.]
In attempting
to consider the functioning of these Tudor
and Stuart proposals, the historian is handicapped.
For the sixteenth, seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries no comprehensive statistics of education are now available. Odd scraps
of information occasionally turn up giving
tantalising insight and prompting many questions.
For example, one early account of the
Royal School at Enniskillen suggests that the
pupils attending were all native Irishmen. [note: Michael Quane, 'Portora Royal School' in Clogher Record (Enniskillen 1965), p.35.]
No further information is available. To what
extent could it be said that those pupils had
accepted the principles on which the school had
been founded? Was their confromity to the new
religion and culture temporary, and a matter of
expediency or was the school functioning as
an effective agent of socialisation? Answers to
questions like these must await further research
and in the meanwhile speculation can continue
though conclusions must be cautious.
Not until the end of the eighteenth century
are there comprehensive statistics available,
evidence itself not only of a more efficient
bureaucracy but of a new interest on the part
of government in education. From incomplete
returns made available in 1810, five hundred
and forty parochial schools were reported as
functioning and student numbers were estimated
at 23,000. By 1823 the number of
schools had reached seven hundred and eighty-two
and pupil numbers were estimated at
36,498. Of that total, 21,195 were returned as
being of one or other of the protestant religions
and 15,303 were returned as catholic pupils. [note: This is based on the account given in Akenson, pp. 24-2 5. His account is based on an examination of various
parliamentary papers.]
The dramatic increase in the number of schools
and in enrolment during the early decades of
the nineteenth century must not be taken as
evidence that those principles and aspirations
embodied in the early legislation were now at
last being realised. It cannot be suggested that
the schools were now functioning effectively in
creating the common anglican outlook which
the tudor and stuart administrations had hoped
for. By the nineteenth century many circumstances
in social and political life had altered
radically and the increased participation reflects
changing attitudes towards education and
developments within the economic structure
rather than anything else. Something similar
can be said about the development of the
'diocesan' and 'royal' schools. Eighteen out
of thirty-four dioceses had schools with a total
enrolment of three hundred and twenty-four
pupils. In 1831 there were twelve schools
functioning with a total of four hundred and
nineteen students. In 1791 a total of two hundred
and eleven pupils were returned for the
royal schools of Stuart foundation. Some, such
as Banagher and Carysfort, had ceased to function
altogether. By 1831 a total of three hundred
and forty-three students were returned. As
will be seen, proselytizing during these years of
apparent growth, was no longer the concern of
the state or indeed of the established church
itself. By the end of the eighteenth century
private voluntary organisations were concerning
themselves with the task of effecting conversions
through schooling and the diocesan and royal
schools were functioning as the schools of the
anglican minority. The growth of such a function
is in itself an illustration of the failure of Tudor
policy in Ireland, and highlights the development
of two separate communities on the
island.
During the eighteenth century a system of
schools organised by private individuals and
voluntary organisations grew up alongside the
system which owed its foundation to the state.
An account of these schools was included by
M. G. Jones in her pioneering work, The
Charity School Movement which was first
published during the 1930's.[note: M. G. Jones, The Charity School Movement (Cambridge 1938), reprinted (London 1964).] Jones rightly
looked at the schools in the context of education
in the British Isles at the time. The
schools in Ireland were a movement only in so
far as they reflected many current social ideas
in their aims and organisation: no central
bureau or organisation directed the movement
and in their different ways the various schools
which became established, each reflected the
hopes of their individual founders and promoters.
A dominant belief which was held by
many school promoters was expressed by
Bishop Butler, an influential supporter of the
schools in England during the 1740's, when he
suggested that the schools 'were not in any sort
to remove poor children out of the rank in
which they were born, but keeping them in it,
to give them the assistance which their circumstances
plainly called for, by educating them in
the principles of religion as well as of civil
life'. [note: Quoted in M. Sturt The Education of the people (London, 1967), p. 6.]
Generally children who attended the
charity schools spent most of their time at 'useful
industry' the profits of which usually went
to the superintendent of the school. Reading
was taught in nearly all of the schools and as
such was intended only as part of scriptural
instruction. A literary education would have
seemed superfluous to the minds of those who
planned the schools. Too much emphasis on
books might well be dangerous as an early critic
of the movement, the polymath, Bernard
Mandeville, pointed out, 'if a horse knew as
much as a man I should not like to be his
rider'. [note: Ibid. p.2] Thus the schools were in many ways
an expression of some of the dominant social
attitudes of the eighteenth century. They expressed
the belief that the mass of the population
should remain in that station and condition
in which God had placed it, while at the
same time they expressed the benevolence and
paternalistic concern of those who sought to
provide some form of elementary education for
the 'labouring poor'.
In an English setting charges of proselytizing
could hardly be levelled at the organisers
and supervisors of the charity schools. English
catholics were predominately members of the
nobility and landed gentry, and were either
educated privately at home, or on the continent.
Apart from a few clashes between members of
some of the nonconformist sects and the high
church organisers of the charity schools, the
history of the movement in England was relatively free of sectarian controversy. However,
because of the way in which religious life in
Ireland had developed during the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, any organiser of a
charity school was forced to consider circumstances
very different from those obtaining in
England. The fact that the vast majority of the
poorer section of the population had a different
religious tradition from that of the ruling ascendency
presented major problems for the organisers
of the schools.
Uniformity of belief among the population,
on matters relating to the authority and power
of the state is essential for the success of any
administration, not least a colonial administration.
The fact was understood clearly and it
determined the legislation of the Tudor and
Stuart administrations. As the seventeenth
century drew to a close and when it seemed
that some form of political stability had at last
been established in Ireland, one course which
seemed open to the government was that of
building on earlier attempts to achieve uniformity
in outlook. For the Tudors that uniformity
of belief, which for them was essential if
proper government was to be achieved, implied
acceptance by the population of the anglican
outlook in religion. The eighteenth century
problem, that was to confront rulers and ruled
alike, was that which sought clarification on
the question of whether or not uniformity of
religious belief was essential for political
stability .. At the beginning of the eighteenth
century it seemed to many that acceptance of
the spiritual authority of the Pope (who was
also the ruler of an important European state)
might imply rejection of the temporal authority
of the governments in London and Dublin.
This seemed all the more likely since the
papacy continued during the first half of the
eighteenth century to regard the catholic
descendants of the defeated James II as the
legitimate heirs to the English throne. Thus
there was a good case for attempting once more
what Henry had hoped to achieve. Zealous
churchmen such as William King of Dublin and
Hugh Boulter of Armagh were enthusiastic,
and actively encouraged any government
proposals which might bring more uniformity
in religious outlook among the population.
However it is now clear that apart from an
initial spurt of activity, the eighteenth century
saw little attempt at an official level to have the
population adopt the anglican religion.- The
reason for this was that it became increasingly
obvious to members of the government that
the Irish catholic population might be at
once catholic in religion, and yet relatively
loyalist in politics. And with the emergence of
a group of catholic laymen and churchmen who
could demonstrate loyalty to the civil institutions,
the government banished any intention,
(if it had ever existed) of effecting conformity
in doctrinal matters. This is not to discount the
very real evidence which exists, demonstrating
that the eighteenth century saw very real discrimination
against catholics in almost every
sphere of civil and religious life. The penal laws
in Ireland were designed to keep catholics in
a position of servitude and not to draw them
into that net which combined religion and
privilege as its defining characteristic. [note: This view of the penal laws is influenced to a great extent by M. Wall, The Penal Laws 1691-1760 (Dundalk,
1967). A slightly different view is taken by Akenson in The Irish Education Experiment. He states on page
40: 'The primary purpose of the laws, however, was clear: to eradicate papery in Ireland.']
It is against such a background that the Irish
charity schools must be viewed. The movement
had one of its more influential promoters in
Hugh Boulter, the Archbishop of Armagh. He
successfully petitioned the government in 1730
for government support and a charter for one
of the principal organisations promoting
charity schools in Ireland, The Incorporated
Society in Dublin for Promoting English
Protestant schools in Ireland. In his petition
he articulated the hopes of those who would
promote schools. The bulk of the population,
he suggested, had little knowledge of true
religion and they were kept in a state of 'disaffection'
by their clergy. It seemed to him
that there was little prospect but that 'superstition
idolatary and disaffection will from
generation to generation be propagated among
them'. He proposed therefore a network of
'English protestant' schools where the children
of the poorer classes might be instructed in
the English tongue and 'the fundamental
principles of true religion to both of which they
are generally great strangers' . [note: Jones p. 235.] Apart from the
schools which received support from the Incorporated
Society, there were many which
received support from the Society for the
Promoting of Christian Knowledge, which was
founded in 1717, while there were a large
number of schools established and endowed by
private individuals.
Reviewing the history of the charity schools
and the charter schools during the eighteenth
century, it is difficult to arrive at a full picture
of the workings, the extent, and the results of
the movement. Records were generally scrappy
and those official returns which have survived,
give little detailed information. The evidence
which has survived and which is now available
suggests that the schools did not achieve the
success which their founders had hoped for
them. A relatively high number of schools were
established at various times during the eighteenth
century but they never managed to attract
large numbers of pupils. At its peak the Society
for the Promoting of Christian Knowledge
probably had less than 3,000 pupils spread over
one hundred and sixty-three schools. The
Incorporated Society reached its greatest size
towards the end of the eighteenth century with
about forty schools and certainly no more than
2,000 pupils. At the end of the century an
official survey produced an aggregate figure of
sixty schools of private foundation. None of
the schools were to confine themselves exclusively
to the education of catholic children
except for the period from 1775 to 1803 when
the Incorporated Society confined admission to
its schools to catholic children. [note: See Akenson pp. 30 to 36 and Jones pp. 215-265.]
If a review
of the history of the movement is expected to
lead to statements about its success or failure,
measured in terms of conversions from one
religion to another, it will be found lacking.
Historical evidence is not available on the effect
which the schools had on the balance of the
different religious groupings during the century.
What is perhaps more interesting to the historian
nowadays, is to look at the way in which
contemporary observers of the scene reacted
to the claims of those who either hailed the
success of the schools, or who denounced their
activity. Such expressions are in many ways a
truer indication of the spirit of the age than
a tedious counting of heads.
As it is, the judgement of less partisan
contemporaries was that the schools were not
responsible for any major change in the population
trends of the religious groups involved.
A full study of eighteenth century educational
processes and their relation to society will
perhaps give some. insight into why the schools
were lacking in impact. It might then be found
that the particular economic and social circumstances
of the eighteenth century rather than
any inherent theological defect were responsible
for the failure of the movement.
Proselytizing entered its most dramatic
and colourful phase during the closing years
of the eighteenth century and the early decades
of the nineteenth century. During that period
at least ten voluntary protestant missionary
societies were active in Ireland. The emergence
of these societies, which were to engage
in intense activity, often in the midst of bitter
controversy, can be linked to a revival of evangelical
ideas within English protestantism at
this time and to movements within the anglican
church in Ireland, itself. Missionary activity
was of course nothing new to any christian
church, - missions are as old as christianity
itself. In post medieval times the Society of
Jesus pioneered the idea, and with the establishment
of a training school for missionaries
in 1542 it placed missionary activity on a
solidly organised base. Following in the wake of
the first successful colonists, the first protestant
missionary society was founded in 1649 for
work in North America. English protestant
missionary activity was to experience a lull
during the early years of the eighteenth century
despite the founding of the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge in 1699 and the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in
Foreign Parts in 1701. Wesley and his followers
did much to breathe new life into a sleepy
established church and their intense humanitarian
feeling added weight to their insistance
on personal conversion and individual commitment.
Methodism had popular appeal and as it
grew and developed into a sect alongside the
Church of England and as a separate institution,
it stimulated evangelicalism within the established
church itself. The latter half of the eighteenth
century was to see many important
developments as a result of this movement:
the slave-trade abolitionists, prison reformers,
Sunday school promoters and foreign missionaries
were all to a great extent reacting against
the worldliness of the established church and
their work was to have profound consequences
for the development of social thought in the
nineteenth century. [note: The societies included the following (place and date of foundation in brackets): Association for Discountenancing
Vice and Promoting the Knowledge and Practice of the Christian Religion (Dublin, 1792), London
Missionary Society (London 1795) British and Foreign Bible Society (London 1804) Hibernian Bible Society
(Dublin, 1806) The London Hibernian Society (London 1806) Religious Tract and Book Society (London
1810) The Hibernian Sunday School Society (Dublin 1811) The Irish Evangelical Society (Dublin 1814)
The Baptist Society for promoting the Gospel in Ireland (London 1814) and The Irish Society for promoting
the education of the native Irish through the meduim of their own Language. (Dublin 1818).]
Missionary societies grew in number with the
expansion of the empire. The closing years of
the eighteenth century were to see missionary
groups setting out for India, many parts of
Africa, the far East, Australia and the West
Indies. Many of those who were to work in
the furthest corners of the globe worked in
Ireland and many of those protestant missionaries
who first worked in Ireland establishing
schools, supervising charities, praying and
preaching were to build on that experience
elsewhere. In coming to Ireland, protestant
missionaries were motivated by the same ideals
which pushed them into those parts of the
globe which were then relatively unknown.
They may or may not have overlooked the fact,
that those whom they intended to preach to
with "conversion" as an objective, were already
practitioners of a christian faith with a committment
no less strong than their own. Ignorance
and in many cases outright bigotry tended
to obscure this fact, and the activities of the
missionaries were often to lead to incidences
of confusion, intense bitterness and sometimes
violence. [note: Some historians of the movement have not written from this point of view. Two historians who failed to take
some account of the idealism, sincerity and godliness of the missionary groups were P. O'Connell in The
Schools and Scholars of Breifne (Dublin 1942) and T. Corcoran in his various publications but especially
'The proselytizing schools 1800-1830' in Irish Monthly, ix, 427-33 (July 1932). Writing about the attitudes
of seventeenth century puritans in Ireland, R. Dudley Edwards has recently commented, ' .. .it is important
for the reader who is not prepared to believe that these English could have had a genuine conviction about
religion and a concern with its mission in Ireland, to put this book down and cease to study the subject'
(The Irish Times, August 9, 1975).]
The London Hibernian Society was perhaps
the most aggressive of the proselytizing societies.
Formed in 1806, it immediately declared its
intention of wiping out 'legendary tales, pilgrimages,
penances, superstitions, offerings,
priestly domination, the notorious habit of
reconciling sanctimonious accents and attitudes
with abandoned practices and all that shocks
and disgusts in the mummery of the masshouse. [note: The best insight into the actual workings of the society and into the attitudes which promoted it can be
obtained from a reading of the society's annual reports which were widely distributed and are now available
in the main research libraries.]
The society set about establishing
a network of schools where the authorised
version of the Bible and religious tracts and
catechisms would provide the curriculum material.
At the height of its activity the society
was claiming to have in excess of 150,000
children and 7,000 adults in attendance at its
schools. It is now impossible to verify or discard
the attendance figures as reported in the
literature published by the society or indeed
from the returns published in parliamentary
reports. Such evidence as is available suggests .
that the numbers reported might be accurate as
indicators of the extent of the society's activities,
but at the same time cannot be used as
indicators of the society's effectiveness. A close
analysis of the data would probably show
regional patterns in the distribution of the
schools and provide information which could
indicate areas for research at local level. An
examination of the returns given by the society
for County Cavan for example, reveals that the
proselytizing schools were at their most active
in those parts of the county where protestants
were in a majority. The society hardly functioned
at all in those areas which were predominantly
catholic, - ironically the areas where
the society was expected to be functioning at
its most effective. [note: Based on the detailed returns made in First report of the commissioners of Irish education inquiry, H. C.
1825 {400) xii and Second report of the commissioners of national education in Ireland, for the year ending
31st March 1835, H. C. 1835 (300)xxxv.]
Such findings often lead
to new questions and tend to suggest that it
is dangerous to accept uncritically statements
which have for long been taken as true. Further
research into the social background of the
children attending the schools would be useful.
There has been a tendency to treat the educational
requirements of all children as being
similar and this has been the case with much of
the writings on the history of Irish education.
Different social groups sometimes designed
education systems to meet the needs of their
children, other social groups found schools
being provided for their children. Questions of
local economic conditions and the attitudes of
landowners, industrialists and government determined
the shape of the educational institutions
in any particular locality and in the long
run proved to be more important than the
impulses and attitudes of individual missionaries.
Landlords such as Farnham in Cavan,
Powerscourt in Wicklow and Ventry in Kerry,
aware of the potential which the societies had as
effective instruments of social control, acted
as local patrons and promoters.
Missionaries responded to the unique characteristics
of local environments and showed
themselves to be aware that local conditions
could help or hinder their work. For example,
the existence of large areas of the county
where Gaelic was the everyday language of the
bulk of the population might have proved a
stumbling block to the missionaries. Such a
situation however, was not to deter men who
had translated the bible into the vernaculars
of Wales and of Malaysia and who had mastered
Sanskrit and the difficult dialects of the tribes
of West Africa. Their response was positive, and
from the beginning many of the missionary
societies employed native gaelic speakers as
schoolteachers and itinerant inspectors while
preachers tackled the learning of a new language
with enthusiasm. One of the more colourful
of the itinerant preachers, the methodist
Gideon Ouseley spoke gaelic in a 'rough fashion'
(He must have looked a rather comical if somewhat
bizzare figure with eye patch and tattered
clothes when, having rowed across the Shannon
estuary at Tarbert, he proclaimed 'Tarbert, I
take thee in the name of the Lord!. [note: A sympathetic account of Ouseley's life is, W. Reilly, Memorial of Gideon Ouseley (London 1847) D. Bowen
in Souperism: Myth or Reality (Cork, 1970) makes some attempt at balancing the harsh comments on Ouseley
in P. O'Connell, The Schools and Scholars of Breifne (Dublin 1942).]
Two
societies were founded for work in exclusively
gaelic speaking areas. They were the Irish Society
for promoting the Education of the Native
Irish through the medium of their own Language,
which was founded in 1818 and the Baptist
Society for promoting the Gospel in Ireland,
which was founded in 1814. Widespread use of
the Gaelic language by the missionary societies
did not slow down its decline as has been suggested
[note: By Bowen, op. cit.] neither was its use in proselytizing
schools an attempt to kill it by lowering its
prestige. [note: T. Corcoran, 'The proselytizing schools 1800-1830' in Irish Monthly ix, (July, 1932).]
Unique among education societies at this
time was the society for Promoting the Education
of the Poor in Ireland, which was popularly
known as the Kildare Place Society on
account of the location of its headquarters. The
society was unique in that its founders intended
that its schools be open to children of all
denominations and that no attempts be made at
proselytizing within its schools. The plan was
that scripture would be read in the schools and
that the teacher would refrain from making any
comment which might reflect the doctrine of
any particular religion. From its foundation in
1811, the society received wide support. Government
funding was generous and many
catholics became closely involved in the administration and teaching. For the first ten years of
its existence the society grew and developed,
but in 1821 prominent catholic laymen including
O'Connell withdrew their support when it
became clear that the society was diverting
some of its funds to some of the proselytizing
societies. The Kildare Place Society had come
close to being a 'national' education society
and it seemed as if its compromise plan for
scriptural education might have added to its
early successes. Given the hardening of political
and religious attitudes which became the
characteristic of the 1820's it now seems in
retrospect, that the failure of the society was
inevitable.
During the 1820's, the proselytizing societies
were to receive a vigorous stimulus as they
became closely identified with the 'Second
Reformation' movement. Intense proselytizing
activity, bitter public debates, charges of
intimidation and a flood of pamphlets and
tracts, all marked a movement whose promoters
hoped would lead to mass conversion from the
catholic religion. [note: A neat account of the phenomenon can be found in B. McNamee, 'The "Second Reformation" in Ireland' in
Irish Theological Quarterly, xxxiii (1966).]
The movement owed much
to the personality of William Magee who as
Archbishop of Dublin was leader of an influential
group of evangelicals within the Church of
Ireland. He felt that conditions were just right
for the effective establishment of reformation
principles in Irish religious life. Given the
political climate of the 1820's the movement
was to take on a new importance for many who
might otherwise have been apathetic or indifferent.
The campaign for catholic emancipation
was under way and many protestant
leaders felt threatened by what they regarded as
militant catholicism. The very basis of protestant
ascendancy was being threatened and
the 'second reformation' for some political
magnates was one possible way to consolidate
their position. In such a political climate the
proselytizing societies sometimes became involved
in issues which they did not quite understand
and which they certainly could not control.
Their task became more difficult as the
post emancipation confidence of the catholic
clergy and laity manifested itself in the building
of churches and schools. In some areas along
the western seaboard notably the Dingle
penninsula and parts of Galway and Mayo, the
movement of missionary activity with its
system of schools and charities was to continue
into the post famine era. However, the movement
lacked any real impetus and was without
popular support and its persistence can be
traced to the work of a handful of devoted
evangelists, rather than to anything else.
By the 1830's the main issues in Irish education
had become clear to most observers and
the positions of most of the parties involved
had become marked out sufficiently for some
form of equilibrium to be achieved. The clearest
indication of this was the appointment of
commissioners by the government in 1831 to
take control and administer a state system of
education which could meet the demands of all
denominations. The emancipation crisis was
over and the catholic church, previously the
participant with an enormous handicap emerged
with a deep sense of achievement and confidence. In matters affecting education its position
had been clearly stated and it would be the role
of successive governments to accommodate
that policy and to ensure that the system of
national education as it evolved met the demands
of that church. As Irish society now
undergoes rapid modernisation and as the
function of education within society becomes
more complex, the controlling power of the
state becomes more apparent. The conflict
between opposing religious interests has now
long disappeared and has been replaced by a
struggle between the Churches and a stronger
though less liberal state.


REFERENCES
1. Taken from the preamble to the act quoted in Report from the Commissioners of the Board of Education in
Ireland, Eleventh report, Parish schools, p. 269, H.C. 1813-14 (47), p.v. and reprinted in D.H. Akenson, The
Irish Education Experiment (London and Toronto, 1970), p.21.
2. J. Simon Education in Tudor England, (Cambridge, 1960) p .173.
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. Akenson, pp ; 26-27.
8. 
9. 10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 14. 
I
15. For the general background to the English missionary movement see K. S. Latourette A History of the Expansion
of Christianity (London, 1943) Particularly useful for the eighteenth century is The Open University,
The Religious Revival in England (Course book, units 31-32, The Age of Revolutions (Walton Hall, 1972).
16. 
1 7. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 22 . 

