The story of the audacious liberation,
two and a half centuries ago,
of the Princess Maria Clementina
Sobieski by four young Irishmen is one
of Europe's great tales of derring-do,
chivalry and romance. It is a fact that ,
when the present writer first read the
tale a long, long time ago, so much
affected was he that he felt impelled
(God forgive him) to turn the story into
verse. It all comes back to me now, as I
lay down a book on the subject which I
have just read for the first time , A. E.W.
Mason's novel, Clementina. And what a
brave book it is!
A man writing an historical romance is
not on oath, and Mr. Mason does himself
nicely . There are thrills and suspense
in plenty as the Chevalier Wogan pursues
his great and desperate venture across
half Europe. In his dark and silent room
in the palace of Ohlau the window-curtain
stirs: surely that which protrudes
beneath is the jewelled shoe-buckle on
a woman's foot? A woman unknown
and menacing, a woman with a purpose ,
a woman who holds in her hand a dagger,
the blade a baleful flame in the cold
moonlight. There are ways of dealing
with such a lady - and with such a foot.
Again. as he tosses restlessly in bed in
an inn near Augsburg, Wogan hears
sounds, sees a shape on the counterpane
at the edge of the bed. Softly the dark
thing moves upwards; it has four fingers
and a thumb. Upwards, but not to the
pillow : it touches his chest, it creeps to
his throat. There are ways of dealing
with such a hand. There is a spacious inn
opposite the Rathaus in Ulm where
Wogan , it would seem, takes no chances.
He closes the shutters, closes the window,
and secures the door by locking it and
wedging the handle with a tilted chair.
In the pitch dark he gropes around for
a candle, loses his way, and now finds
his hand on the door of a cupboard in
the wall. He stretches his arms inwards,
touches something that moves beneath
his hand, it is a short stiff crop of hair,
it is a man's head - once more there are
fingers at his throat. Never mind, this
intruder also shall be dealt with .
This is the very stuff of cloak-and-dagger
historical romance. Bless the
novelist's imagination! But his crimson
embroideries were not necessary to make
the tapestry a colourful and spectacular
one.
His books set me searching for my
earlier composition. Mercifully only a
few scattered verses, written on loose
pages, have survived the changes of
thirty years. Since the reader must be
spared nothing, here are the first two:
Sobieski's royal daughter hath a
dowry in her face,
And a prince in throneless exile
seeks a bride.
Seeks a bride whose name is lightning
in the sunset of his race,
That the white-cockaded Stuarts
may regain their regal place -
'Tis a cause in which the true and
brave have died.
What cavalier, knight-errant , shall
unite the royal pair ?
(The Elector hath a menace in
his eyes).
Brave the peril of axe or gallows,
snatch the victim from the lair ?
Thine the task for high fulfilment
gallant Wogan of Kildare
Against all that the Elector may
devise!
Well , here at least are some of the
dramatis personae . The exiled prince is,
of course the man who, on the death of
his father, was, at the gates of the palace
of Saint Germain, on 16 September,
1701, proclaimed King Jam es III of
England and VIII of Scotland, and was
immediately recognised as such by
France's Grand Monarch and by the
King of Spain. Wherefore he was forthwith
attainted by the Parliament of England
of high treason; it was treason to
correspond with him, treason to assist him
or remit money for his cause. When, less
than a year later, William of Orange
died in London, William's sister-in-law
Anne, who was James's own sister,
ascended the throne. Her religion - she
was Protestant - made her acceptable
to those who controlled England's
destiny. And the fact that she was a
daughter of James II, once the unquestioned
rightful sovereign, gave her title
to the crown a thin veneer of respectability.
For twelve years she would block
her brother's way to inheritance. But
after Anne - what then? There would
be no children, in the direct line of the
Stuarts, to succeed her. Unless James's
claim were then recognised, a monarch
would have to be found from among the
swarm of European cousins. The finger
seemed to point to the unpleasant
George Guelph, Elector of Hanover.
However, it was computed that there
were as many as fifty-seven individuals
of royal blood whose claims were
stronger than his. If this outsider came
to the throne, it would be against the
wishes of nine-tenths of the people.
Anne herself cherished the hope that her
brother would succeed her. It seemed,
then, that all James had to do was to
wait.
What manner of man was this exile of
whom it has been said that he might well
have proved one of the best of British
monarchs? History and literature, both
ever willing to serve the cause of the
victor, have tried , not altogether successfully,
to write him off. Unflattering
tags such as 'Jamie the Rover', 'the
Pretender' , 'Old Mr. Misfortunate' served
useful purpose thereto. But they do
him less than justice.
To be sure, there was something he
lacked. Not his the glamour, the charm,
the engaging ways that distinguished so
many of the Stuarts before him, and his
captivating and romantic son after him.
Pensive, withdrawn and melancholy, his
way was the lonely way of adversity
and ill-luck. But if he seemed to want
fire and elan, he was upright and honourable,
chivalrous, courageous and
humane. A man of unbending principle,
he refused to dissimulate or change his
religion when such a course would have
made his succession to the throne a
certainty. And so it was that when onOF A PRINCESS AND FOUR IRISHMEN 53
1 August, 1714, Queen Anne died, the
illiterate and repulsive Elector of Hanover
became King of England.
This was the second of two serious
blows to James's hopes. The first came
a year previously, when hostilities
between France and England had been
brought to an end by the Peace of
Utrecht. Under the terms of this treaty ,
France was reluctantly compelled to recognise
the Hanoverian succession, James
being obliged, accordingly, to depart
from that hospitable land which had
befriended his family in dark days, and
which was the second home of his devoted
adherents, the officers of the
Irish Brigade.
The intrusion of the Hanoverian
George was a challenge to the faith and
loyalty of James's supporters. The
Jacobites responded by taking the field
in 1715, under the incompetent leadership
of the Earl of Mar. They were strong
in Scotland, and received some assistance
in the north of England. But Mar was
defeated at Sheriffmuir, and the insurrection
in England was crushed at Preston.
The English Jacobites were punished
with severity and there were many
executions, Kenmure and the gallant
Earl of Derwentwater paying with their
lives on Tower Hill in February, 1716.
The rebellion had failed, and Jacobitism
would have to await another day.
There was no reason to despair,
however. King James, at twenty-seven,
was a young man in the prime of his
powers. His cause attracted considerable
support, not only in Scotland and Ireland.
but in England as well. And George's
unpopularity was increasing every day.
Indeed Jacobitism was rampant, quite
literally under that monarch's very
nose. Not until the twentieth century
were finger-bowls placed on the dinner-table
of the British sovereign, because in
former times those who secretly sympathised
with the Jacobites had the
infuriating habit of drinking to the
King 'over the water'. James, then,
could surely try again. Meanwhile, he
would do well to consolidate his position
and enhance his prestige in Europe. For
this, a matrimonial alliance with a distinguished
family would be of crucial
importance.
Negotiations were set afoot for a
marriage with the Czar's daughter, or
with his niece, the Princess of Courland.
The project came to nothing. The
eligibility of other royal ladies was
discussed, including the Princess of Saxe.
At Ohlau, in Silesia lived Clementina,
attractive grand-daughter of that renowned
John Sobieski to whom Europe
would be eternally indebted for the
great victory over the Turks, thirty years
earlier at the gates of Vienna and who
was elected King of Poland as John III
in 1614. James appointed a trusted
emissary to report on the eligibility of
the different princessess, and to make
the final selection of a bride for the
King Over the Water. His agent was an
Irishman.
Among the prisoners of gentle birth
taken at Preston by the Hanoverian
army were the veteran Brigadier Mac
Intosh and a dashing young Kildare
officer, Charles Wogan. The Wogans of
Rathcoffey had a proud record of service
to the Stuart cause: a member of the
family, Colonel Edward Wogan, once
saved the life of King Charles II, at the
battle of Worcester, by a desperate
stand at the head of three hundred
horse against Cromwell's whole army.
After the surrender at Preston, Charles
Wogan, with the principal prisoners was
brought pinioned on horseback under
military escort to London, and committed
to Newgate Prison. In April, 1716,
the grand jury of Westminister found
Bills of Indictment against Wogan and
Mac Intosh. Their trial on the dread
charge of high treason would be held
on a date in May in Westminster Hall.
The trial never took place. Plunging
characteristically into a whirlpool of
violent and dramatic action, Wogan
found his salvation. On the midnight
before the trial he, with seven other
prisoners, overpowered the keeper and
turnkey of Newgate Prison, burst through
an armed guard of nine grenadiers,
and regained liberty. Quickly the alarm
went out, and a reward of five hundred
pounds was offered for his recapture.
For a few days he remained concealed
in a house in London. Then his hiding
place was found by a search party.
The soldiers forced their way in, accompanied
by a large crowd, hungry for
a share in the reward. By this time
Wogan was on the roof-tops. There was
a grim game of hide-and-seek among the
chimney stacks, and at length the
Irishman succeeded in eluding his pursuers.
By the end of June he had made
his way to France.
He now became secret agent for James
III. On 25 November, 1717, the Duke of
Mar issued to him in writing, on behalf
of the King, the confidential instructions
which would lead to the supreme adventure
of his career. He was to travel to
Germany in search of a bride for the
royal exile. Relying on his known
'discretion, secrecy and good conduct',
the King desired him to make the journey
under an assumed name, to visit all the
Courts, and to report on the eligible
princesses - how he might gain access
to those courts, or secure the necessary
introductions, was left entirely to his
own initiative.
Having visited Durlach and Baden
Baden, Wogan arrived at Ohlau early in
the year 1718. His introduction at the
palace was effected through the good
offices of the Governor of the town,
who turned out to be an Irishman and
a kinsman to boot. Prince James Louis
Sobieski was given to understand - correctly
enough - that his guest was a man
who had given worthy service in the
Stuart cause, and Wogan was welcomed
at the gay round of court festivities and
entertainments. He was thus in an excellent
position to supply well-informed reports
on the three princesses who were
Prince Sobieski's daughters, and the Irishman
had little difficulty in arriving at
a preference. His choice was the youngest
girl, Clementina, the family favourite.
Her attractive appearance - Wogan was
specially struck by her beautiful dark
eyes - was matched by merit of character,
education and disposition. True,
she was somewhat small; but James's
agent was in no doubt: "If the youngest
daughter had the stature of the second,
she would be perhaps the most desirable
wife in Europe for a Prince".
Wogan returned to Urbino ; and his
recital so pleased his master that Jam es
decided to propose for the hand of the
Princess Clementina. For political reasons,
and because of the opposition to
be expected, it was intended to keep the
matter secret until the marriage had
actually taken place. And it was precisely
here that Jam es made his mistake,
and fell victim to a political intrigue. It
might have been thought that the formal
negotiations for the alliance would have
been entrusted to Wogan. The suggestion,
however, was made to James that English
Protestant susceptibilities would be offended
if a Catholic Irishman were given
this honour; and the business was taken
out of Wogan's hands. The result was
that King George and his ministers got
early intelligence of the proposed
match, and of the Princess's acceptance
of Jam es Stuart as her betrothed.
They reacted strongly. Not only did
Clementina bear the heroic name of Sobieski:
she was the niece of three Electors,
she was cousin of the King of Portugal,
her mother was the aunt of the Holy
Roman Emperor Charles VI. The prestige
of such a connection must not be allowed
to accrue to the Stuart cause; and
George and his ministers resolved to prevent
the marriage at all costs.
The sum of one hundred thousand
pounds was promptly offered, as an
increase to Clementina's dowry if she
would consent to marry the Prince of
Baden or any prince other than King
James. And if this offer should fail,
other means could be tried . The Emperor
had extensive possessions in Italy and
Sicily. To defend these dominions against
Spain, he had to rely on the presence of
British warships. And if King George
should withdraw, or threaten to withdraw,
the assistance of this fleet ...... .
James's emissary, Sir John Hay, went
to Ohlau for the purpose of escorting
the Princess and her mother to Bologna,
in northern Italy. The party travelled
incognito, by a long and circuitous
route through Germany. This journey
took them through Austrian territory ;
English agents were on the watch everywhere;
and their passage through Ratisbon
was not unnoticed. The English ambassador to Vienna immediately brought
heavy pressure to bear on the Emperor.
An Imperial courier was soon on his way
to Innsbruck, and the instructions which
he delivered to General Heister were
precise and unmistakable. When Clementina
and her mother arrived in that
city they were arrested and placed in
close confinement.
The arrest was against the law of nations;
it was contrary to the usages and
constitutions of the Holy Roman Empire.
There were appeals and protests from all
sides. But the entreaties of the Electors,
of the Empress Dowager, of the Pope,
counted for little in Vienna against the
threats of the English ambassador.
The Emperor would not relent. Clementina
remained a captive. James Stuart,
it seemed, would need Wogan's services
once more.
The eyes of Europe were on Innsbruck,
and General Heister was not the
man to take chances. His prisoners,
though well treated, were carefully
watched. A magistrate visited the house
twice each day to make sure that Clementina
was in secure custody, and the
roads to Innsbruck were diligently guarded
against any attempted release and
delivery.
In November, 1716, Charles Wogan
submitted his plan for the rescue of
Clementina Sobieski. At the outset the
secret was made known only to the Pope
and to the somewhat sceptical Cardinal
Legate at Bolonga.
To begin with, it was necessary to
communicate the design to the prisoners ,
and also to secure the approval of
Prince Sobieski at Ohlau. For the journeyings
through many provinces which
this would entail, the Pope provided
Wogan with a passport which described
him as the Count de Cernes, a Flanders
nobleman who had vowed to make a
pilgrimage, with his family, to the shrine
of the Holy House at Loreto. It was,
however, in the guise of a French merchant
that he visited the Princess at
Innsbruck. The broad outlines of the
plan were discussed with the princesses
and their chamberlain, Chateaudoux.
When the time came, Wogan's rescue
party would be a small one - no more
than two or three persons of proven
loyalty and courage. The Princess would
feign illness and keep to her room for
some days before the rescue. On her departure
a maid would immediately occupy
her bed, with curtains drawn, in
order to keep up the pretence for as
long as possible that she was still there ,
and so delay the inevitable pursuit. A
carriage and horses would be provided
for the journey over the Alps into
Italy, and it would of course be necessary
that the princess should have a female
companion on the way. To these arrangements
Clementina gladly agreed.
When Wogan went on to Ohlau it
was to find that Prince Sobieski's consent
to the project would be more difficult
to obtain. Clementina's father regarded
the design as an absurd fantasy which,
while imperilling his daughter's life and
honour, could only end in shameful
failure. For Wogan himself the Prince
expressed the highest regard and admiration,
but to his pleadings he turned a
deaf ear. The turning-point came when,
on New Year's Day, 1719, Prince Sobieski,
as a personal gesture to the Irishman,
presented to him a tobacco-box,
encased with gold and carved from a
turquoise which the renowned John
Sobieski had found in the Grand Vizier's
pavilion on the day of the great victory
at Vienna. Courteously but firmly Wogan
refused the gift: he would not, he said ,
go back to Italy with a present for himself
but a refusal for his sovereign.
Wogan's single-mindedness and devotion
now won their reward. Pressing on him
with his own hands the historic memento
, Prince Sobieski yielded to his request
without reserve , and committed his
daughter to his care, giving him in writing
full powers to take whatever steps
he considered necessary in her interests.
This marked the final decision to attempt
the rescue. Elatedly, Wogan took the
road back from Ohlau to organise the
operation to which he had committed
himself.
Even before he left the Sobieski
palace, ominous signs of counter-activity
were not wanting. Keen eyes at Ohlau
Court had noted Wogan's second visit,
and Imperial agents recollected that his
first sojourn there had preceded Clementina's
departure on the journey which
was halted at Innsbruck. One of these
agents, the beautiful and brilliant Countess
de Berg, came to the conclusion that
some kind of scheme was afoot to effect
the escape of Clementina, and arranged
with her brother, the Governor of
Breslau, to have Wogan arrested at
Prague on his return journey from Ohlau.
Suspecting the lady's design , Wogan
indeed set out on the Prague road. But
his would-be captors waited in vain,
for , after a day's delay in Strehlau, the
Irishman suddenly turned sharply to the
left off his declared course; and, avoiding
Prague, passed instead through Vienna
itself and through Augsburg. His ultimate
destination was the town of Schlestadt,
in French territory near Strasbourg.
In Schlestadt was stationed the Regiment
of Dillon. Since the formation of
that famous unit , the Wild Geese of
Dillon's command had covered themselves
with glory in Italy and in Spain.
Now, during the uneasy peace , the
Regiment was on garrison duty with the
Army of the Rhine. In order to ensure
that the Irish officers did not involve
themselves - publicly at least - in anti-Hanoverian
activities, they were forbidden
to leave their posts in the French
Army . Many of these officers were
friends or relatives of Wogan. Their
loyalty to the Stuart cause was unquestionable.
And Wogan could rely on their
intrepidity and resourcefulness. From
the officers at Schlestadt he selected the
three who would accompany him to
Innsbruck.
Of the little band of adventurers,
one of the extant verses recalls that
Wogan, indeed, is partly mad.
(The Mayor of Strasbourg knows
him)
Misset and Gaydon are just as bad - What
boots it now to oppose them?
May the Lord look down on that
flighty maid
That ventures with these on this
wild escapade,
But Janet's in love with that Irish
fool,
National Portrait Gallery
Princess Clementina Maria Sobieski
With rollicking dare-devil Luke
O'Toole
And the carriage is ready for
Innsbruck.
If Wogan was mad - and many years
afterwards he lightheartedly assured
Dean Swift that such indeed was the case
- his was the madness of the visionary
who essays and achieves the impossible.
He had no difficulty in picking his team .
Oldest member of the party was Major
Richard Gaydon, later to become a
Lieutenant-General in the French Army .
He was Wogan's uncle , and belonged to
a well-known Kildare family. It was
Gaydon who suggested Captain John
Misset , a young officer of Kildare
extraction, whose gay and charming
wife would also have a part to play.
The powerfully-built Captain Luke
O'Toole completed the quartet. Six feet
high , he was the finest man in the Regiment
of Dillon it was said, and had
something of a way with the ladies.
Mr. Mason's portrayal of the four
comrades is a happy example of the
novelist's art. Working by way of contrast
and comparison, he depicts a well-balanced
and well-adjusted team. Wogan,
high-souled and romantic man of action,
is, in his own imaginings, lord and king
of a faery city; some day the lady of his
heart will come riding at sunrise on a
black horse across the flat silent plain to
his City of Dreams. But a dream is a
dream merely, and can never be more
than a dream - nor must Clementina, of
all people , ever attempt to discover the
identity of the lovely rider of the shadowy
steed on that far plain. Gaydon,
the cautious one, prudent, discreet and
circumspect, overlooks nothing and is
given to minding his own business.
Misset, the enterprising, is a man of
stratagems and resource: Captain Wogan
will need his services if the venture is
going to succeed. Genial, waggish and
sportive O’Toole is the fun-maker of the
party ; the sight of his mighty frame is a
comfort to the little band , and his
knowledge of German comes in very
useful.
What is it they propose to do? Crossing
the Rhine at Strasbourg into Imperial
territory they will make their way
through Ulm to Innsbruck , a distance
of well over two hundred miles. At Innsbruck
they will snatch Clementina from
her jailers, make for the Brenner Pass on
the high road to Italy , and push on amid
the snow-capped Alps , passing down the
Valley of the Adige through Brixen,
Trent , Rovereto and Ala. Not until
they have reached Venetian territory at
Peri, five miles beyond Ala, will they have
left the Emperor's dominions behind
them , and be safe from arrest. The distance
from Innsbruck to Peri is on e
hundred and fifty miles .
The time-factor is of considerable
interest. All going well , the journey by
coach from Innsbruck would normally
take three to four days. Riders on horseback
, sent in pursuit of the coach could
accomplish it in less than three. It was
vital , then , that the rescue party should
have , so to speak, a day in hand. This as
we have seen they hoped to achieve by
placing a substitute for the Princess in
her bedroom, a pretence which could
only be kept up with success for a day at
the most - discovery thereafter was
certain, and the pursuit would begin
immediately. The rescue-carriage , then ,
must put in its very best performance on
the road from Innsbruck to Peri. But
how if it should turn out, when the time
came, that, ahead of the rescue-coach on
that road, another party should happen
to be travelling in the same direction at
a more leisurely pace ; a party which it
were prudent, if at all possible, not to
overtake for fear of recognition ; a party,
moreover, which would naturally have
first call on all the post-horses available
on the way? In that case the leading group
would certainly slow down the rescuers,
which would be, to the benefit of the
pursuers closing in from behind. It was
a contingency which Wogan could not
have foreseen.
But that lay in the future. Now, at
Strasbourg, the time for departure was
at hand and the venture that would
astonish Europe was under way. Great
were the hazards and high the stakes. If
the rescuers won through ! there would
be the meed of honour and renown, the
gratitude of their sovereign and his
queen, the esteem and approbation of
the Pope and of the many continental
princes who set store by rightful and
lawful succession. If they should fail
the penalty was certain - an ignominious
death on the hangman's rope. And the
odds against them were appalling; it
was an empire against four. Indeed the
Intendent of Strasbourg, who had a
shrewd suspicion of what was afoot, told
them, as they were setting out, that they
were "attempting to make a hole in the
moon" ..... "You are not crossing the
Rhine for nothing" he said: "Adieu, mes
enfants, for I know you are men who
will either conquer or die". The Chevalier
Lally , Colonel of the Regiment , had been
let into the secret, and accompanied
them to the outskirts of the city. There
he bade them farewell , expecting never
to see them again.
With the four chief actors travelled
Vezzozzi, King James's valet-de-chambre,
who, though armed to the teeth, would
in Wogan's wry opinion prm1e no asset at
all in an emergency. There were two
women. Though expecting the birth of
a child, Madame Misset had generously
consented to accompany her husband
and his friends. She would be Princess
Clementina's personal companion. Her
maid , Jeanetton, would substitute for
the Princess after the escape. And this
was the way of it, as the little cavalcade
pushed ahead through the German lands.
Using the passport furnished by the
Pope, Richard Gaydon, the senior
member of the party, became the Count
de Cernes, travelling with his Flemish
Countess, Madame Misset, on a visit
to the Loreto shrine. The pious couple
were accompanied in the carriage by the
lady's brother, Wogan, and her servant ,
Jeanetton. On horseback alongside the
carriage rode the Count's armed guards,
Misset, O'Toole, and Vezzozzi. After
Innsbruck, of course , the composition
of the carriage party would change:
Jeanetton would be left behind , to be
replaced in the coach by 'the Count's
daughter', Clementina.
A week's tense travelling, in the course
of which their passports were frequently
scrutinized, took them to the village of
Nazareth. The date was 23 April, 1719,
and they were now one day's journey
from Innsbruck. At Nazareth they halted
and stayed for some days. For there was
much to be done - the all-important
finishing touches had to be put to the
rescue plan.
The first requirement was to get in
touch with Clementina, her mother,
and her trusted servants, and issue final
instructions. Disguised as a merchant,
Misset, man of strategems, went into
Innsbruck and presented to the ladies
Prince Sobieski's commission to Wogan.
They were informed by Misset that the
rescue would be attempted on the night
of Thursday, 27 April.
Each morning and each evening the
Innsbruck magistrate visited the princesses
personally on General Heister's
orders. Clementina would feign symptoms
of illness on the days immediately
preceding the escape: at the right moment
her illness would prove to be a fever
and she would take to her bed. On the
fateful Thursday Jeanetton would enter
the apartment dressed in an old riding
cloak. Clementina would leave soon
afterwards in the same cloak, and would
be met outside in the darkness by Wogan,
who would lead her to the Black Eagle
Inn where the carriage would await her.
Jeanetton would occupy the Princess's
bed and draw the curtains, in the hope
that the vital period of one day might
elapse before the ruse was discovered.
Clementina would leave behind a letter·
addressed to her mother, asking both
her parents to excuse her for the step she
had taken, and explaining that, in the
circumstances, she had not the opportunity
to seek their prior consent for her
action. It was hoped that this letter would
serve to exonerate the 'older Princess
from complicity in the rescue plot, and
so save her from General Heister's rage.
Such were Wogan's precise instructions,
sent through Misset to the ladies
at Innsbruck; and the Chevalier made it
quite clear that he expected his directions
to be obeyed to the letter. Misset was
ordered not to return from Innsbruck
to Nazareth. Instead he was to ride on
ahead on the road to Italy, and await, at
a lonely hostelry on the Brenner Pass,
the arrival of his comrades with the
Princess Clementina.
While the remainder of the party
waited at Nazareth, poised for the strike
at Innsbruck, Madame Misset's time was
occupied in coaching Jeannetton for the
part she had to play. And Madame
Misset's hands were full. Her headstrong
and unpredictable pupil was a grenadier's
daughter who could, in her frequent
moments of displeasure, swear as fluently
as any trooper. She was, however, usually
simple, goodnatured and credulous,
though not handsome; she had a very
tall and shapely figure of which she was
inordinately proud - all the more so
because her height gave her a resemblance
to the towering O'Toole, with whom,
everybody knew, she was head over
heels in love. Nay, if tallness be an asset,
then , quite clearly it is something to
be emphasized. Wherefore , Jeanetton
had taken enthusiastically to the wearing
of high-heeled shoes which raised her
another five inches off the groupd, and
which were eyed with cold disapproval
by Wogan , who could not help remembering
that the petite Clementina was by
comparison very diminutive indeed.
Would the difference in height between
the lady who entered Clementina's
prison-residence , and the lady who left
soon afterwards escape the sentry's
notice? Time would tell.
Meanwhile the briefing of Jeanetton
went on. She was not made aware of
the true nature of the enterprise. Instead,
she was told that the lady with whom
she was to exchange places was O'Toole's
sweetheart, a beautiful German heiress ,
whom her tyrannical parents kept in
close confinement in order to prevent
her marriage to the Irishman. This none
too original tale of cruelly sundered
lovers appealed powerfully to Jeanetton's
impressionable heart; it was a situation
in which she could render service of a
highly sentimental kind to her much-admired
O'Toole ; and there was, besides ,
the promise of a reward of one hundred
pistoles. Now, if only she could be persuaded
to be sensible about those high-heeled
shoes ..... Grimly , Wogan set
about supervising the preparation of a
supply of roast chickens for the journey
from Innsbruck to Peri: there must be
no unnecessary meal-breaks oh the road.
He proved an indifferent judge of fowl,
or perhaps his mind was on other matters.
For, when the time came to eat those
veteran birds, the flesh was as tough as
tree-bark.
Meanwhile , a messenger arrived from
Innsbruck with news of most unwelcome
complications. Two distinguished visitors
had arrived there, the Prince of Baden
and his mother. By an odd coincidence
they, too, were making the pilgrimage
to Loreto. But there was surely something
else in the wind for they travelled in
great state, and their delay at Innsbruck
was a needlessly long one. And for two
whole days the prince made a nuisance
of himself by his attentions to Clementina.
Plainly he - or was it his mother?
- had taken careful note of King George's
offer to increase the dowry of the
Polish Princess by £100,000 if she should
marry somebody besides James Stuart.
Quite clearly he was on the verge of a
proposal of marriage, if given any encouragement.
But Clementina, who disliked
the man , made it plain by her
attitude that such a proposal could meet
only with a rejection. Their purpose
having miscarried , there was no reason
why the Badens should prolong further
their stay in Innsbruck . They announced
that they would leave for Italy on Thursday
27 April , the very day fixed for the
rescue. They would be using the same
road. In order to ensure that the Baden
party would have left Innsbruck well
before the entry of the rescue team,
Clementina' s mother requested Wogan to
defer his arrival at Innsbruck until eight
o'clock on that Thursday night. Wogan
could only agree ; it was too late now to
change plans. And O'Toole brought the
ominous news that the Princess's messenger
had been recognized by the sharp-eyed
innkeeper at Nazareth.
At daybreak on Thursday Wogan and
his friends set out from Nazareth for
Innsbruck. Jeanetton sulked mightily on
the way, for Wogan had firmly decreed
that the high-heeled shoes be discarded
in favour of sandals. Indeed, the fitting
on of those sandals had provided the
occasion of a fine display of temper on
Jeanetton's part, for she vented her wrath
on the startled Nazareth shoemaker,
whom she upended with a tremendous
heave of her stockinged foot. And if,
in the end, she yielded to O'Toole's
blandishments, her mood was still black.
Madame Misset , however, was in high
spirits; she could tell a story wittily and
well ; and her recitals kept the party
entertained until , as darkness fell , they
entered Innsbruck.
It was a terrible night for the time
of year. Such a storm of snow and sleet
swept Innsbruck as the old city had not
experienced for many years. At eleven
o'clock that night Wogan met Chateaudoux
, Clementina's chamberlain, who
now urged the Irishman to abandon the
enterprise. In view of the weather
conditions , he said , Clementina's mother
strongly objected to the attempt. Besides ,
Clementina's indisposition was by no
means wholly feigned ; she had weakened
her constitution by a rigorous Lenten
fast, and it would be inhuman to expose
her to such a storm. Wogan brushed the
objections aside, with some sharp words
for people who persisted in throwing
obstacles in the way of the Princess
and of the men who had come so far at
the risk of their lives to help her. There
was no more time to waste. Chateaudoux
must return forthwith with the message
that unless the Princess's page reported
back before twelve o'clock to guide
Wogan to the residence , then he , Wogan,
would wash his hands of the affair. He
would, moreover, let the king know
where the blame for failure lay.
The Irishman's determination impressed
Chateaudoux , and the two men
hurried back to their respective headquarters.
At half past eleven Wogan left
the Black Eagle Inn accompanied by
Jeanetton, who was still fuming. Sure
enough, at the pre-arranged spot , the
Princess's page awaited them. And they
made their way through the storm-lashed
streets to the house where the
Polish ladies were held captive.
A fortunate sentry hath come on
a fool
With a generous heart and a sovereign,
Quaffs many a toast with Luke
O'Toole
That night in an Innsbruck tavern.
And freely , nobly, the liquor flows ,
And maudlin-merry the sentry
grows,
Till he mumbles and staggers and
falls in the yard,
But palace and prisoner are left
with out guard
In the tempest and darkness of
Innsbruck.
Here the verse-narrative is somewhat
unfair to the sentry, at whose expense
it compresses into one episode two
separate and distinct incidents, the
second of which occurred later, many
miles away. True it is that the soldier
who guarded the door of the building
where Clementina was imprisoned proved
somewhat negligent on that wild and
bitter night. Numb with the cold, and
believing that in such a storm his watch
would in any case be undisturbed,
he had betaken himself to the warmth
and hospitality of a nearby inn. The
door, then , was unguarded when Jeanetton
passed through at a few minutes
past twelve, and went upstairs to Clementina's
apartment.
Now commenced for Wogan a long
and agonizing wait in the darkness without.
Clementina had earlier retired to
bed. After her lady-in-waiting left the
room she dressed herself again. She composed
a farewell letter as arranged, to
her mother, another to her lady-in-waiting,
and made up her jewels in a
packet. Jeanetton arrived, and placed her
dripping cloak on the Princess's shoulders.
All that remained for Clementina to do
before her departure was to bid a last
farewell to her mother - leave-takings,
in such circumstances are apt to be
prolonged.
Wogan heard with dismay the half-hour
strike: yet the Princess did not appear.
The suspenseful minutes passed, each
minute an eternity of deepening misgivings.
And still no sign. When the clock
struck one, the Irishman lost hope -
surely the plot had been discovered.
But, if so, why was the house so quiet
and still? Why no outcry? He would
wait a few minutes longer.
Then the door opened and Clementina
stepped out into the howling gale.
In a few minutes she was at Wogan's
side ; there were greetings and apologies ;
and together in the teeth of the blizzard
they faced the mile-long walk to the
Black Eagle Inn, through the snow and
slush of the streets. They were joined on
the way by the Princess's page , who
carried a large packet containing the
jewels of the House of Stuart, which
had been sent to Clementina from Rome
some time previously. By the time they
arrived at the inn she was drenched.
Having been introduced to the rest of
the party whom she warmly welcomed,
greeting them as her 'brave liberators’,
Clementina was immediately taken to
Madame Misset's apartment for a change
of clothing, whilst O'Toole fetched the
horses. Thus by two o'clock, on the morning
of Friday 28 April, they were ready
to start.
In the coach were Gaydon alias the
Count, his family , and Wogan. Ahead
rode Vezzozzi, behind came O'Toole.
Travelling at full speed they soon left
the town behind. Clear at last of Innsbruck,
all within the carriage were in
high spirits. Compliments and congratulations
were being exchanged when
a sudden recollection, voiced by the
Princess, sent a thrill of apprehension
through her hearers: "Where is my packet
of jewels"'? The packet was missing, it
had been left behind at the inn. The
loss represented something more than
the value of the jewels: it had an immediate and deadly significance. For, the
moment the packet was found and examined
at the inn it would certainly be
handed over without delay to the
authorities; and then the game was up.
Had the landlady already inspected their
room? Wogan halted the party and ordered
O'Toole to gallop back immediately
at top speed. He found the inn in darkness;
there was no commotion of any
kind ; obviously the hostess had gone to
sleep straightaway after their departure.
The front door, though bolted , offered
little resistance to his powerful shoulder.
Once inside O'Toole moved softly and
carefully until , having . located the
room , he found what he sought. Then ,
leaving the inn noiselessly, he mounted
his horse and rode away to rejoin his
companions, who awaited his return in
silent suspense as Clementina wept
tears of remorse. Their mood changed
when O'Toole triumphantly produced the
missing packet. Wogan, though relieved,
must have reflected that another quarter
of an hour had been lost - fifteen minutes
which could make a world of difference
in the end. So much, in an enterprise
like this , depended on little things -
a snuff-box accepted or rejected, a pair
of heels retained or discarded, a packet
remembered or a packet forgotten.
Now for the Brenner Pass! The steep
ascent over a distance of fifteen miles
would have taxed the horses' strength at
any time. Undertaken at night through
drifting snow it was arduous in the extreme
. Nevertheless , they made good
tracks and at sunrise reached the inn on
the summit of the pass, to be greeted
there by Misset. And now the long hours
of tension and exposure had their effect
on Clementina, who fainted at the inn.
Her collapse at this early stage of the
flight must have alarmed Wogan. Were
Chateaudoux and the older Princess
right after all? Were the strains and
hardships of the journey too much for
a young girl to endure? When given a
restorative, however , by Madame Misset ,
Clementina recovered quickly; and they
took the road for Brixen.
Brixen lies at the foot of the southern
incline of Mount Brenner, and the descent
was made at great speed. For the
travellers, the difference between the
northern and southern aspects of Brenner
proved to be the difference between
Baltic winter and Mediterranean summer:
last night they had been buffeted by the
icy blasts of the north, today they were
caressed by the balmy breezes of a kindlier
climate. Having partaken with relish
of certain sinewy chickens, the family of
the Count de Cernes were in high spirits
and sang lustily as the carriage rattled
along on its way. Galloping behind ,
O'Toole could hear what was to be heard
but it was what he could see alarmed
him.
He saw with awful suddeness the
spectre of death. The steep and ancient
mountain road down which they were
speeding was so narrow that two vehicles
could pass each other abreast only by
using the most extreme care. And the
unprotected side of this road overhung
the Adige River at a precipitous angle.
In front, travelling towards them appeared
a large , heavy cart. The driver of this
cart, seeing the rescue coach thundering
down upon him, opted for safety and
the inner side of the mountain roadway.
Perhaps the carriage was travelling so
rapidly that it could not be controlled,
or perhaps the coachman and postilion
were drunk. In any event they never
slackened speed even as they passed the
cart. O'Toole watched with horror as
the two left wheels of the carriage careered
to the edge of the cliff and then
left the road altogether; .and hung over
the precipice, spinning crazily in empty
space high above the Adige. It seemed as
if nothing could save the occupants of
the coach, all unaware of their danger
National Portrait Gallery
Prince James Francis Stuart
of being dashed to pieces far below.
O'Toole, in that terrible moment resolved
to share their fate when the most unexpected
happened. The left front wheel
struck a projecting spur or tree-stump,
and the force of the impact hurled the
carriage right back again on the highway.
Aghast, O'Toole rode forward, halted
the coach, and grimly, wordlessly,
thrashed the drivers with his riding-whip
under the scandalized eyes of Wogan,
who could not understand this display of
raw violence in the presence of their
future Queen. Not until they arrived at
Brixen did O'Toole reveal to his leader
what had happened. And by this time
they had other things to think of. For
here, while changing horses, they learned
that the Baden party had passed through
but a short time previously, and could
be no more than four or five posts ahead.
This was bad news. Fresh horses would
now be difficult to obtain; they were
still deep in hostile territory, and the
danger from behind grew greater with
the passing of each hour.
The delay in Brixen was brief, and they
were on their way once more. Night fell,
the night following their first full day on
the road. Clementina did not sleep,
preferring to listen to her companions'
reminiscences of the doings of the Wild
Geese. But while Wogan entertained her
with tales of Preston and Cremona,
his mind was busy. By now the Princess's
absence had been long discovered, the
alarm had been raised, they were being
hotly pursued: so much at least was certain.
But what form would the pursuit
take? What would be its nature? Since
speed was essential, did it not seem
probable that General Heister, instead
of sending a detachment of troops from
Innsbruck, would utilize those garrisons
already in position on the road? In other
words, he would employ a fast-riding
courier whose mission it would be to
get ahead in the shortest possible time
with instructions to the Governors of
Trent and Rovereto to halt and arrest
the refugees.
A courier could be and must be dealt
with, even though it meant decreasing
Clementina's small escort. At a posting-stage
some four stages from Trent,
Wogan announced his decision and gave
his directions. O'Toole and Misset were
to detach themselves from the party and
fall behind, keeping a very careful eye
at the posting-stages for a rider from
Innsbruck. Should the Innsbruck messenger
be encountered, they were to take
from him any packet he might have in
his possession, leave him bound and preferably
unharmed on the roadway. They
were to kill his horse.
The coach-party continued on its ·
way. Misset and O'Toole lagged behind,
as directed. At 2 a.m. on the second night
of the flight, they reached an inn at the
village of Wellishmille, two stages from
Trent. Supper was ordered, and as they
sat down to their meal another newly-arrived
traveller entered the room. It
could only be the courier.
They had no difficulty in engaging
him in conversation; all the fellow
wanted was an audience for his tale of
woe. His journey from Innsbruck had
been exhausting in the extreme. The
horses which had been supplied to him
along the way were spent and exhausted,
and had fallen under him half a dozen
times. Now bruised, battered and dejected,
he yearned for sympathy and
the wherewithal to quench a mighty
thirst. The Irishmen, posing as merchants
from Brixen, promptly invited him to
join them for supper. Straightaway he
was gulping down huge bumpers of wine
which, even when water was added, he
found appetizing and strong; no wonder,
for what he was adding was not water
but -potent Strasbourg brandy, a bottle
of which Misset had poured unperceived
into the water-jug. Soon the courier,
hopelessly drunk, was unbosoming himself
to his newfound friends. Yes, there
was fine commotion in Innsbruck,
caused by the disappearance of the
Princess Sobieski, who had been stolen
from her prison by a band of brigands.
The authorities were in a state of great
perturbation and alarm; and a furious
General Heister would stop at nothing to
recapture the lady and punish the villains
who abducted her. Orders were being
sent to the Prince of Taxis, Governor of
the Trentina, to arrest the offenders.
Indeed he , the speaker, was the bearer of
the dispatch - in proof whereof he
produced the packet from his pocket
and laid it on the table. It was still on
the table when, dead drunk, he fell
asleep a few minutes later. Misset and
O'Toole lost no time in destroying the
dispatch . And now their work was done.
There was no necessity to tie up the
helpless courier; he would be unable to
open an eye for a good twenty-four
hours. His hosts considerately carried
him to bed before setting off to rejoin
the main party.
For Wogan in the carriage, it was a
long , frustrating and anxious night.
Exhausted and dispirited , the horses
lumbered along at what seemed a snail's
pace. Would they succeed in getting a
change of horses at Trent? And would
there be a long delay there? Much depended
on the answer to these questions.
Trent was a danger point for two reasons.
In the first place , should Clementina be
recognised there, the Prince of Taxis
needed no directive from Innsbruck to
tell him what to do. He was the Emperor's
representative ; he had full knowledge
of imperial policy in relation to the
Princess ; his duty would be to detain her
if the opportunity came his way. Furthermore,
that Clementina would be recognized
in Trent was all too likely.
Many of the better-class citizens of the
town had seen her and met her quite
recently in Innsbruck when attending
a carnival there.
At nine o'clock in the morning of
Saturday, 28 April, the carriage entered
Trent, at the same time as the Badens
and their retinue were leaving the town.
There were no post-horses to be had, the
Princess of Baden having taken all that
were available . Thus the horseless rescue-coach
was drawn up for hours in the city
square under the curious scrutiny of the
passers-by , to whom it seemed strange
that the passengers, though half-suffocating
in the sweltering heat , did not
betake themselves , as became persons of
distinction, to the cool comfort of an
inn. But Clementina, who was wrapped
up for better concealment in an oppressively
heavy mantle , could not leave the
carriage or even show her face at the
window. Vezzozzi was sent to search
the town for horses at any price , but all
in vain. Wogan's predicament was now
critical. To make matters worse, O'Toole
and Misset had not yet arrived; there was
no knowing how they had fared; if their
mission had proved a failure Heister's
courier could appear at any moment.
And all the time, local interest in the
stranded coach with its mysterious occupants
was mounting.
In this situation Wogan with sublime
effrontery determined to enlist the aid
of the Prince of Taxis himself. There
were, the Irishman knew, horses at work
on the neighbouring farms. In order,
however, to have these animals placed at
his disposal, it would be necessary to
procure an order from the Governor.
Forthwith, Vezzozzi presented himself
at the residence of the Prince of Taxis
with greetings from the Count de Cernes
and an urgent request for the appropriate
warrant. The reason given for the Count's
haste is worth noting: he must lose no
time in overtaking the Princess of
Baden, for whom he had a most important
message .. .... .. .
The Prince of Taxis was not in the
best of moods on that sultry Saturday
morning. Irritably nursing an attack of
the gout, he was confined to his room,
and asked for nothing better than to
be left severely alone. (Incidentally , this
may have been just as well ; since it diminished
his chances of learning anything
of the peculiar goings-on in the town
square). As things were, however, the
Prince had little sympathy to spare for
other people's misfortunes. Vezzozzi was
not permitted to see him, and a servant
brought the answer that the Governor
could do nothing: the Count de Cernes
must simply wait until post-horses
became available in the ordinary way.
Wogan pondered the situation, and determined to have another try. If there
was a chink in the Prince's armour, it
was his desire not to be intruded on by
visitors. Yet it was a safe bet that he
would not wish to appear directly discourteous
or inhospitable towards any
foreign nobleman travelling through his
city. This was Wogan's cue. He directed
Vezzozzi to go back and say that the
Count's predicament was such that he
had now resolved to place the facts ,
in person , before the Governor, and
would visit him for that purpose . It
worked like magic ; no visit was necessary.
Rather than have any unwanted guests
come between himself and his gout ,
the Prince gave Vezzozzi the warrant for
the horses ; and even sent two of his
servants to ensure that the warrant was
obeyed. But an exhaustive search of the
neighbourhood produced only two horses
in very poor condition. A generous
bribe procured two additional animals.
which, having been used immediately
before, should now be resting. At half
past one the coach left Trent. The delay
was four and a half hours.
The next halt was at Rovereto, where
there were further set-backs. To begin
with, the ordeal in the town square of
Trent took its toll on Clementina, and
she fainted once more, but recovered in
the comfortless Rovereto inn. Wogan
tried but failed to secure a change of
horses. There was nothing for it but to
continue the journey with the miserable
animals they had found at Trent, the
coachman being again bribed to comply.
The next town, Ala, would be the last
garrison town in the Emperor's dominions.
Five miles beyond Ala lay Venetian
territory, and blessed safety.
Before they reached Ala, the carriage
jolted against a heavy stone lying on the
roadway, and the axle broke. To proceed
without repairs was impossible. After
some searching Wogan and Vezzozzi
located in a house about a mile away the
axle of a disused cart. This they lashed
with ropes to the broken axle, as a splint
on a fractured bone, and continued
gingerly on their way. Within a mile of
Ala another collision proved too much
for the frail makeshift, the ropes became
severed, and there was a total breakdown.
They abandoned the coach, Clementina
sank knee-deep in a stream which the
darkness hid, as she proceeded on foot
to Ala. At Ala they made their way to
the principal inn, to find that the Princess
of Baden was already installed there.
Wearily they turned aside to another
hostel, where Madame Misset provided
the Princess with a change of clothing.
And once more they were ready to proceed
, if only transport could be found.
Hitherto the difficulty had been to
get horses; now they had neither horse
nor carriage. But there could be no question
of delay. Wogan got to work, and at
length found a primitive cart which seated
two people. In this vehicle the ladies
were accommodated; and with Wogan ,
Gaydon and the coachman trudging
gamely alongside they followed the road
to Peri. Half way between Ala and Peri
they came to a point on the roadway
where a wall on either side told them
all they wanted to know. When they
passed that spot they broke into the Te
Deum in thanks to God. They were now
in Venetian territory. At eight o'clock in
the morning of Sunday 30 April, 1719,
they entered Peri, and went directly to
attend Mass. They were not the only
strangers in the little church that morning.
Throughout the Mass, Clementina,
behind her veil, was conscious of the
prolonged intent stare of a gentleman
who belonged to another party of travellers.
Not that it mattered now, really,
but the gentleman was the Prince of
Baden.
The Princess rested at the inn after
Mass and at one o'clock their joy was
complete when Misset and O'Toole
arrived at last, accompanied by Vezzozzi
who had seen to the repair of the abandoned
carriage.· All was ship-shape now,
and they headed for Bologna, where
they would meet King James's official
emissaries, Murray and Lady Hay. At
Bologna on 9 May, the marriage ceremony
was performed, Wogan representing King
James, who was in Spain at the time.
Clementina received an invitation from
the Pope to go to Rome and await there,
as his guest, her husband's return.
Sobieski's royal daughter journeys
sunward to her home,
And the King across the water hath
a bride.
Ring the splendid news to Europe,
peal the triumph o'er the foam,
As the Wild Geese winging proudly
o'er the cheering throngs of Rome
Greet their own especial Lady and
their pride.
The Innsbruck Enterprise had been a
brilliant success. In recognition of their
services, the Pope, Clement XI, bestowed
on each of the four Irishmen the august
title of Senator of Rome. James Stuart,
not to be outdone, conferred knighthoods
all round, making Wogan a Knight-Baronet.
He also granted them brevets of
high military advancement which would
become effective should they wish to
enter the service of any of those European
powers which recognized the Stuart
succession. The Pope himself blessed
the marriage of James and his goddaughter,
Clementina at Montefiascone
when James returned.
Their ways parted, however. Wogan
and Misset finally took employment in
the Spanish Army, and served with distinction
in North Africa. Misset became
Governor of Oran in Algeria. After his
death in 1753 Madame Misset and Jeanetton
retired to Barcelona and spent the
remainder of their lives there. Having
covered himself with glory against the
Moors at Santa Cruz, Wogan was rewarded
with the governorship of La Mancha.
To the end of his career he remained
an active supporter of the Stuart cause.
O'Toole, the gay and gallant one, met a
soldier's death on the Moselle. Gaydon
died at an advanced age in 1745.
In that same year a captivating and
handsome young prince came out of
Europe to the Highlands to write the
most poignantly romantic chapter in
Scotland's chequered history. His name
was Charles-Edward-Louis-Philip-Casimir
Stuart, but he is better known as Bonnie
Prince Charlie. His father was King
Jam es III and his mother was the Princess
Marie Clementina Sobieski, one-time
prisoner at Innsbruck.
