Morgan Prussia was said to be
the biggest man in Europe. And
if he wasn't that, he was certainly
the biggest man in the army of Frederick
the Great, where the tall men were
plenty and well known to fame. But this
distinction brought no joy to the heart
of Morgan Kavanagh, who had been
pressed in to the service of the King of
Prussia and was unhappy with his position.
Here was a wild goose whose wings
longed for the fair hills of holy Ireland,
and especially for the fair hills between
the Barrow and the Slaney, where all the
Kavanaghs hail from.
One day Morgan met Frederick the
Great, and they had a conversation on
the following lines ; though, to be sure, I
cannot vouch for every word that was
said:
"You’re a fine figure of a man," said
the king. "Where do you come from?"
"From Ireland, Your Majesty ," replied
Morgan, with honest pride.
"Are they all as big as you in Ireland?"
"As big as me? Sure, I'd pass for no
size' at all in Ireland. Any one of my four
brothers is a bigger and finer man than
I am!"
"In deed" , said the king , greatly interested;
"and do you think your four fine
brothers would like to come and join
you in my regiment?"
"Well, there 's no way of knowing
until they're asked. I'll tell you what: if
Your Majesty will let me go to Ireland
I'll try and coax them over."
"Off you go so , " said the king. And
that was the last he saw of Morgan
Kavanagh, or Morgan Prussia as he became
known in the Barrow Valley,
where he lived until he died. But every
year on the anniversary of his escape he
would climb to the top of Brandon Hill,
tum to the East and make a royal salute
to the King of Prussia.
Borris Idrone, the heart of the Kavanagh
country, lies away down on the
River Barrow, hidden among wooded
hills. The Barrow is a back-to-front
river, in topographical terms. One
expects a river to rise in the mountains
and to flow through flatter land as it
nears the sea, The Barrow does indeed
rise in the Slieve Blooms, but its upper
reaches traverse the Offaly bogs and the
level plains of Laois and Kildare, and as
it flows southward it meets mountain
country. If you come to Borris by river,
as I first did, you will become conscious
of this as soon as you pass Bagenalstown
and the blue summits of the Blackstairs
come in sight. Gradually the countryside
becomes more densely wooded. Trees
crowd around, until presently your boat
is being carried by the stream along the
edge of a forest, to stop finally at a
cottage a long way from anywhere,
like the magic boat in The Snow Queen.
One would hardly be surprised to find
an old woman there, leaning on a crutch
as in the fairy tale, and asking: "How
did you manage to come on the great
rolling river and to float thus far out
into the world?''
This forest through which the river
runs is part of the MacMurrough Kavanagh
demesne, and beyond the trees are
Borris House and Borris Idrone, a neat
village of cut-stone houses climbing
up and down a hill. This place has been
associated with the Kavanaghs, and before
them the MacMurroughs, kings of
Leinster, for over a thousand years. The
Kavanagh branch of the family are descended
from Domhnall the Handsome
(Caomhanach), bastard son of that
Dermot MacMurrough who brought the
Normans to Ireland. The original MacMurrough
territory was Hy Kinsella,
which covered roughly the same ground
as the counties of Wexford and Carlow.
In English law these two counties belonged
to the descendants of Dermot's
daughter, Eva, who married Strongbow.
Eva took care to establish the illegitimacy
of her half-brother, Domhnall
Caomhanach, in order to make good her
own title - and that of Strongbow - to
the lordship of Leinster. But the Brehon
laws, on which Domhnall's claim rested,
took little account of illegitimacy; thus
the MacMurroughs continued to be regarded
as kings of Leinster and chiefs of
Hy Kinsella, even though the ownership
of their territory was vested in the descendants
of Strongbow.
In 1377 Richard II was crowned King
of England, and Art Og MacMurrough
Kavanagh succeeded to the kingship of
Leinster. Richard was then a child of
eleven and Art a youth of nineteen.
English power in Ireland was at a low
ebb and the country had become a constant
drain on the royal exchequer. The
encroachments of the Gaelic chieftains
had driven many of the proprietors of
the lands of the Pale back to England
and septs such as the MacMurroughs
were being paid "Black Rents" as a
protection for those who remained:
twenty marks a year were paid to the
MacMurroughs "for the safe-keeping of
the Royal roads between Carlow and
Kilkenny." In 1394 young King Richard
landed at Waterford, determined to overawe
the country into submission and
restore English power in Ireland. He
brought with him the greatest army
Ireland had ever seen: five hundred
ships carrying archers, men-at-arms, horses
and artillery. "It is not in memory,"
wrote a contemporary, "that ever any
king of England made such apparel and
provision for any journey to make war
against the Irishmen, nor such a number
of men-at-arms nor archers."
Richard marched northward from
Waterford, crossing the Barrow by the
bridge of Leighlin and sending his armies
raiding far into MacMurrough territory,
as far south as the Pollmounty river and
eastwards across the Blackstairs mountains.
His archers and cavalry slaughtered
all before them, burned scores of villages
and carried off great preys of cattle. One
raiding party, led by the Earl Marshal,
Nottingham, almost captured MacMurrough
himself. "He broke in upon him,
and if he had not been foreseen, he would
have found the said MacMurrough and
his wife in their beds." MacMurrough 's
wife was an Englishwoman, Elizabeth le
Veel (or Calf), and she had lost her inheritance
in the Barony of Norragh because
of her marriage to an Irish rebel.
Now she and her husband left in such
haste that they had to abandon their
personal effects, including "certain articles of feminine use, but of no great
value," and Art's royal seal: "Sigillum
Arthurii Mac Murgh Dei Gracia Regis
Lagenie." The Earl Marshal, deprived of
his quarry, "was sorely vexed thereat,"
and proceeded to punish MacMurrough
by burning his house, together with
fourteen villages in the vicinity, and
driving away four hundred cattle.
The campaign was successful. Within
three months of his arrival in Ireland
Richard received MacMurrough's submission,
together with that of other Irish
chieftains of the marches of the Pale:
Garret O'Byrne, Donal O'Nolan and
Felim O'Toole, Captains of their Nations.
"Bare-headed, disarmed, their girdles
undone, holding their swords by the
points, with the pommels erect ....
there came humbly to obey us, to surrender
and submit themselves the said
MacMurrough and three other captains,
kneeling and acting in the aforesaid
manner, of whom we took oath on the
Cross of Dublin, to be to us loyal and
faithful subjects." Under Richard's terms
Art MacMurrough was to quit Leinster,
where his lands would be given to "obedient
English", and was to become a sort
of mercenary in the service of the king,
in receipt of "good and fitting wages"
from the royal treasury for conquering
lands in other parts of Ireland which he
would then hold for the king. In addition
he was to receive a special fee of
eighty marks a year and his wife's inheritiance
in the barony of Norragh was to
be restored.
No doubt it all seemed very logical at
the time, and MacMurrough accepted the
plan without demur, in another colourful
ceremony "in an open field called Ballygory
, near Catherlogh, on the side of
Slievemargy, in the diocese of Leighlin."
Richard returned to England well pleased
with himself, believing like many a British
leader since, that he had solved the
Irish question. But he was hardly out of
sight of land when the whole settlement
fell apart and the Gaelic chieftains were
again up in arms. One of the flaws in
Richard's plan was that there were few
new lands for the displaced Leinster
chieftains to conquer. In his progress
around Ireland at the head of his vast
army, he had collected the submissions
of almost all tribal leaders of importance,
on similar terms. And the "good and
fitting wages" never materialized, nor
did MacMurrough see any sign of his
wife's lands nor his fee of eighty marks.
Things came to a head when the "obedient
English'' tried to move in on the
Leinster lands, and in a battle with the
O'Byrnes near Carlow the Earl of March,
Richard's lieutenant in Ireland and heir
to the English throne, was killed. So for
the second time the king assembled an
army and set off across the Irish sea:
"Now for our Irish wars.
We must supplant those rough rug-headed
kerns,
Which live like venom where no
venom else
But only they have privilege to live. "
But the venomous rug-heads were not
so easily supplanted on this occasion.
For one thing, Richard's army was much
smaller than the great expedition he had
mounted four years earlier, and was unable
to punish the tribesmen with the
same ruthless efficiency. Richard himself
seems to have lost his former military
and diplomatic skills, or perhaps he had
lost his good advisers: for he had alienated
much of the English nobility
by actions that smacked of malice and
caprice rather than rational government.
It was hardly the best moment to
come to Ireland, with so much disaffection
at home. But then, there is some
reason to believe that the poor man had
gone slightly astray in the head, even
dreaming of mounting an expedition to
Borris House, home of the Kavanaghs.
The Gateway, looking out
Italy to make himself king of the Romans.
Meanwhile Art MacMurrough had
gone from strength to strength, and was
now calling himself king of all Ireland,
which in his circumstances was hardly
less realistic than Richard's dream of
ruling Rome. He scoffed at the idea of
submission, and it was now his turn to
harry the English army, cutting off
great numbers of troops in guerilla attacks
and then fading into his woods.
Whether Richard would have succeeded
in burning him out we shall never know,
for the ominous news of Bolingbroke's
landing in the Humber sent the king
hurrying back to England, to lose his
throne, his liberty and finally his life,
starved to death in prison. It was a strange
irony that this was brought about by
Richard's efforts to reassert his authority
over that Gaelic chieftain who had made
his submission with so much ceremony
four years before. But it was to mean
even more than the death of a king, for
the seeds had been sown of the red rose
and the white. As Curtis puts it, Art
MacMurrough had, by delaying Richard
in the wilds of Leinster, let in usurping
Bolingbroke and wrecked the unity of
England for a hundred years.
But as the centuries rolled by, the
MacMurrough Kavanaghs gradually became
reconciled to the English presence.
The Cross of Dublin, or Bachall Iosa, on
which Art MacMurrough had pledged
allegiance to Richard II was burned in
1538 on the orders of Henry VIII's
archbishop of Dublin, but Art Buidhe
MacMurrough Kavanagh, Arthur the
Yellow, swore allegiance to the Tudor
monarch and was created Baron of Ballyann.
From that time forward the Kavanaghs
in every generation loyally supported
the English monarchy and their
estates continued to extend to the tops
of the Blackstairs mountains. In 1641
Brian Kavanagh declared for Charles I
and the castle at Borris was besieged in
turn by insurgent Irish and the forces
of Cromwell. But the Kavanagh fortunes
emerged undiminished from the Cromwellian
wars, for in the Down Survey of
1654 there is a record of "Brian Kavanagh,
of Borris, by the Burrow, a Protestant:
lands not forfeited." Another Brian
Kavanagh, known as Brian na Stroice or
Brian of the Scar, fought for James II at
the Boyne and Aughrim and was said
to be the tallest man in the Jacobite
army. His tomb is to be seen beside the
penal altar in the churchyard of Saint
Mullins, near Graiguenamanagh, the traditional
burial place of the Kavanaghs and
of their predecessors, the Leinster kings.
By now the Kavanaghs were no longer
a clan in the old Celtic tribal sense. Junior
branches of the family went their separate
ways, many to continental Europe
where they served with distinction as
soldiers or administrators. There were
Kavanagh wild geese in the armies of
Austria, France and Spain where a
branch of the family still flourishes. A
son of Brian na Stroice, John Baptist
Kavanagh , joined the Austrian Imperial
service and became the first Baron
Ginditz of Bohemia. His son was Count
Maurice Ignatius Kavanagh , Colonel
proprietor of Cuirassier Regiment No. 4
from 1786 to 1801, who was promoted
Lieutenant General in 1790 and died
at Buda on 6 April, 1801. Another
Kavanagh, Morgan or Charles, was Governor
of Prague in 1766, and held the
rank of a Polish Field Marshal. Karl
Baron von Kavanagh, born in Ireland in
1709, was Colonel of Baireuth Infantry
Regiment No. 41 and was wounded at
Torgau in 1760. General Moritz Shortall
Baron de Kavanagh, who died in Graz in
1792, had served for forty years in the
Regiment of Durlach and been its Colonel
from 1771 to 1782. Jakob Julius
Baron Kavanagh von Balyane, born in
Vienna in 1812, was Colonel of Infantry
Regiment No. 52 and was killed at
Vicenza in 1848. Did he ever visit
Ballyann , that tiny place on the bank of
the Barrow near New Ross? And did he
know that his title was first conferred on
Art Buidhe MacMurrough Kavanagh by
Henry VIII?
From Brian na Stroice descended that
legendary line of giants, the tallest
men in Europe, of whom there were
members still living in Vienna in the
middle of the last century. But there
were other wild geese who flew home.
Morgan More Kavanagh, who fought
under Prince Eugene of Savoy at Blenheim, Ramilles and Malplaquet, returned
to Ireland in the first half of the eighteenth
century. His son, Brian, child of
his wife, Frances Esmonde, inherited
Borris and built the present house. It
passed to his son Thomas, who redecorated
it. There is some disagreement about
this, and the present proprietor believes
that the house was built by Thomas.
Certainly it was Thomas who gave it
its present appearance, or more accurately
it was his wife, the Lady Susanna Butler,
niece of the Earl of Ormonde, who did
so. Under her influence Italian stuccadores
installed the elaborate plaster
ceilings in the principal rooms and the
pillars of Scagliola work in the hall and
dining room. The library, one and a
half stories high, with an unusual rope-pattern
moulding on its shelves, also
dates from Thomas's time; but it was his
son, Walter, who bought the books, and
according to some authorities he also
greatly altered the house, employing
the Morrisons to convert it into "an
English baronial mansion of the sixteenth
century."
Visiting Borris House today, one has
the impression of a Georgian house that
has been Tudorized, with the superfluous
mouldings around its rows of regular
windows and the elaborate battlements
that give the whole structure a top-heavy
appearance. At one time the four
comer towers were crowned by lead
turrets with conical caps, the removal of
which has if anything improved the
architectural character of the house; but
the curious array of little pillars, each
carrying a stone urn, still remains atop
the battlements, giving the impression
from afar of a lot of heads stuck on
spikes - not an inappropriate feature of
a baronial residence of the sixteenth
century.
But, for all these eccentricities, Borris
House has great dignity; and its situation
is superb, on a hill commanding wide
views of the Barrow Valley and the
Blackstairs range. The present Kavanagh,
a young man hardly into his thirties, is
clearly proud of the place, although the
struggle to maintain it is a back-breaking
one. Nearly twenty years ago a FitzGerald
relative, writing in the Bulletin of
the Irish Georgian Society, foretold the
end of Borris: "The house will soon be
empty and roofless. The daws which
possess the chimneys of every traditional
Irish house will have the walls as well.
This is inevitable. The house has been
rebuilt, altered, enlarged and generally
muddled since the original keep was
built in the ninth century that it is now
impossible to maintain. It still needs the
battalions of servants and unlimited
cheap fuel that poured into the house
until the first world war left so many
big houses in reduced circumstances."
Nevertheless Borris House still stands ,
and remains today in Kavanagh hands;
though the owner, in his battle to maintain
it, has had to retreat to a flat in
the stables and the house itself is rented
to an American family.
In the courtyard of Borris House
there stands a great oak tree. Here, in
the l850's, Arthur MacMurrough Kavanagh
would hold court for the people
of Borris, seated on the stone mounting
block which encircled the bole of the
oak. Clad in a flowing black cloak, with
a young pet bear chained at his side,
he gave the bizarre impression of a medieval
baron seated in the midst of his
vassals. But if we are to believe his
biographers, this was a kindly baron, to
whom his tenants brought their domestic
and legal problems; who helped them
with their correspondence, dispensed
advice on such matters as health and
education, made out wills, patched up
lovers' quarrels and acted as matchmaker.
At Christmas he was to be seen
doing the rounds of his poorer tenants
on horseback, a galloping Santa Claus
with gifts of blankets, flannel petticoats
and joints of beef tied to his saddle.
This in itself would have been sufficiently
remarkable in mid-nineteenth
century Ireland, not exactly a period of
enlightenment where the landlord class
was concerned. But there was a lot more
than this to Arthur Kavanagh, who was
in many ways the most interesting member
of his family since the great Art
Og MacMurrough Kavanagh who challenged
the might of England, and whose
name he bore. For Arthur Kavanagh,
Member of Parliament, Lord Lieutenant
of the County Carlow, Member of the
Privy Council of Ireland, magistrate,
world traveller, yachtsman, sometime
dispatch rider in the East India service,
crack shot, keen fisherman and a number
of other things, had been born in 1831
without arms or legs: mere six-inch
stumps where his limbs should have been.
It was a disability which would have
condemned most people to a life of
crippled misery, especially in an age
when artificial limbs were so primitive
as to be useless.
He had, it is true, a lot in his favour:
wealth and status and a host of enlightened
friends who were prepared to help
him overcome his disability. But from
the beginning it was the cool determination
of his mother, Lady Harriet Kavanagh,
which gave him the courage not
only to equal but to excel those who
suffered from no such handicap as his.
It was Lady Harriet who made Protestants
of the Kavanaghs. Through the
vicissitudes of the penal days , and despite
occasional forced conversions such
as that of the Brian Kavanagh mentioned
in the Down Survey, the family had
remained Catholic, and Arthur's father,
Thomas II, had married a Catholic Ormonde,
Elizabeth Butler. But when she
died he married Harriet le Poer Trench,
a Low-Church Protestant of determined
views. "She was a bigot, and she made
Protestants of the lot of us ,, , says a
present-day Kavanagh.
Bigoted or not, this remarkable woman
took her crippled child in hand with an
unsentimental firmness which refused to
recognise the existence of any handicap.
He was given a Spartan upbringing and
subjected to the same severe Victorian
discipline as her other children. Almost
as soon as he was able to sit upright
young Arthur was put on a horse; at the
age of four he was given his own pony,
and by the time he reached his teens he
was a superb horseman, at one with his
mount as only a rider could be for whom
it took the place of legs. In the stables of
Borris House I found and photographed
one of the special saddles he used, an
elaborate affair with the cantle built up
into a metal-framed bucket seat into which
the rider was strapped. Roaming the meadows
and woods of the Barrow Valley, for
ever in the open air, young Kavanagh enjoyed
a life of physical activity such as
most people, with the use of all their
limbs, never experience. He could shoot
and fish from horse-back, holding the gun
or rod squeezed between the short stumps
which were all he had for arms. He once
landed eight salmon in a day, including
one of thirty-six pounds; which is remarkable
testimony not only to his skill but
also to the sad deterioration of our salmon
rivers during the last century.
From top:
Arthur Kavanagh's oak tree.
Ceiling de tail.
Library, showing door.
Arthur Mac Murrough Kavanagh's
special saddle.
In some respects young Kavanagh was
too well gifted, for he was handsome and
engaging and by all accounts he was a
terror with the ladies. When a lad born a
cripple can have as much success in that
respect as did Arthur Kavanagh, there's
hope for yourself and myself! I can find
little to support what one present-day
Kavanagh told me, that he "sired them
by the thousand," but his amorous
exploits were enough to draw down the
ire of his family, and especially of his
mother, who felt that Arthur was in
danger of rushing "into a vortex of idle
and extravagant pleasures." She bethought
herself of the standard remedy
used for such a condition by the affluent
families of the age, and Arthur, with his
elder brother, Tom, and his tutor, Mr.
Wood, embarked in June 1849 on a
prolonged period of foreign travel: to
Scandinavia and Russia, down the Valga
to Persia and Kurdistan, and by the valley
of the Tigris and the Persian Gulf to the
Bombay Presidency and the Province of
Beran. In those days it was a hair-raising
journey and only one of the three travellers
- the crippled Arthur - was to return
alive. Tom died of tuberculosis at sea
and Wood carried on to Australia where
he died in an accident. Arthur, left
stranded in India, entered the service of
the East India Company and might have
made a career for himself in the Raj
had not his mother, repenting of her
harsh decision , called him home.
Not long after his return to Ireland
Arthur's remaining brother, Charles,
died in a fire and the local superstition
which prophesied a crippled heir for the
Kavanaghs, was fulfilled. Borris and its
estates were in a chaotic state, ravaged
by the effects of the Great Famine. The
new landlord of Borris set to work with
characteristic energy, modernising farming
methods, establishing light industries
and designing and constructing the neat
stone cottages that one sees in the main
street of the village today. He encouraged
the founding of the Borris Lace industry,
built a sawmill to process the timber of
Borris Forest and brought the railway
down from Bagenalstown at his own
expense. As a landlord he was far in advance
of his time, as active in social
matters as he was in the management of
his estates. "He does good to his people,"
said Father Carey, the parish priest of
Borris, "props the tottering tenant, helps
the weak and builds houses for the
poor."
But, for all this liberality, Kavanagh
was a conservative by political affiliation
and a passionate supporter of the landlord
system. As a Tory M.P. at Westminster
his friends and political associates
were such people as the Beresfords of
Waterford, whose most notable contribution
to Irish history had been the
In old Borris
Looking down on Ciashganny lock.
Barrow Navigation near Borris.
wholesale eviction of the tenants who
failed to support them in the elections
of 1826. Kavanagh's error was paternalism,
the belief in benevolence as a
substitute for rights. As the century
wore on and the effects of agrarian agitation
penetrated to the quiet acres of
Borris, he clung to the hope that the
ancient tribal tie which united the Kavanaghs
with their tenants would prevail
against the new currents sweeping the
country. It was a vain hope. In 1879
the National Land League was established,
with Parnell as president and
Davitt a secretary, and in the general
election of 1880 thirty Parnellite candidates
were returned to Westminster.
Arthur Kavanagh met the same fate as
had overtaken his friends, the Beresfords:
abandoned by his tenants and swept
from his seat by a Parnellite.
It was a bitter blow for the Baron of
Borris, and the ingratitude - as he saw
it - of his tenants and workers was to
rankle with him until his death nine
years later. But he also blamed his defeat
on "the lack of a policy on the part of
the bad landlords, of which Ireland has
too many." As for himself, although
he spent much of his remaining years
in Britain, and died there, he went on
being a conscientious landlord, and
encouraged his son Walter to be the same.
Walter did more than that, for he became
a Home Ruler and stood for County
Carlow as a Nationalist, thereby incurring
that most dreaded of penalties among
the Irish ascendancy: expulsion from the
Kildare Street Club!
The present Kavanagh of Borris grows
barley and raises cattle and sheep on his
two hundred odd acres, and regards
himself as a farmer pure and simple.
"There are those who would like me to
be something more, but those days are
gone." His problems are those of other
farmers: the ups and downs of cattle
prices, expensive feed grains, the vagaries
of the E.E.C. But he has the added problem
of the 'Big House'. "There's a great
temptation to sell it to some rich German
or American", he says. "One could
acquire a really decent farm ; enjoy a
reasonable standard of living; send the
children to good schools. I often ask
myself that: whether it is fair to the
children to try to hang on."
But the children have names like Morgan
and Aoife: names that speak not
merely of history but of continuity and
survival. Perhaps it is because. they are
Irish that the Kavanaghs have survived
when the Carews and the Bagenals and
the other planter overlords of the
barony of Idrone have disappeared.
Arthur Kavanagh, the cripple, though he
liked to speak of himself as an Englishman,
was right to value the ancient
tribal tie that bound him to his tenants.
These acres are, and always have been,
in Irish hands. This "English baronial
mansion of the sixteenth century" is
an Irish house. The daws will not have it
for a while yet.
"Of course, times have changed,"
says Mick Boyle, in his little workshop
a few yards from Arthur Kavanagh’s oak
tree. "You don't get the same class of
person to work on an estate like this any
more. We used to turn our hand to anything.
If it was a broken-down engine or
a sick beast or somebody to be picked
up at the station, we'd do it. Now it’s
nothing but hours and conditions and the
least work for the most pay." Clearly,
he himself was still willing to turn his
hand to anything. He was a skilled mechanic
and fitter, with a great love of
engines and an ability to turn a piece of
metal into anything he wanted. In the
first world war he worked on the French
Gnome rotary engines used on the early
fighter aircraft: curious contraptions in
which the motor revolved around its
shaft, spraying castor oil in all directions.
But his best love was steam. He proudly
demonstrated his miniature John Fowler
traction engine, a perfect scale model at
two inches to the foot, developing a half
horse-power at 40 lbs. per square inch. It
had taken him six years of spare-time
work to build, and he had fashioned all
parts on his own lathe.
"I intend to leave it to the Wexford
Museum at Enniscorthy," said Mick. He
was seventy-nine years then, and now
that I hear sadly that he is dead, I hope
his wish was respected. In industrialised
countries like Britain there are many like
him, artists in metal; but in Ireland they
are so few that their work surely commands
all the respect we can give it.
Peter Cody represents another aspect
of Borris. Every fine morning he stands
at the door of his shop in the village,
opens it and goes back behind his counter
and waits for people to come in. But
there is nothing to buy or sell in his shop.
Peter is now eighty-seven or eighty-eight
- he is not rightly sure which -
and a long time ago he went, you might
say, into retirement. It was not that he
closed his shop, but he gradually ceased
to do business. Nothing has changed
there for more than thirty years, and
some of his shelves have lain under their
heavy coat of dust for much longer than
that. Wartime posters adorn the walls,
urging you to go "over the top, for
700,000 acres of wheat!" Another
tattered advertisement proclaims that
Lion Boot Polish, made by Carr & Son,
does not crack the boots or attract the
dust. A small packet of Murphy's Pure
Rice Starch stands on a shelf. It was
made in the Barrow Starch Works,
Graignamanagh, which closed down following
a strike about sixty years ago.
The little box is still full of starch.
"Would you like to have it?" Peter asks.
He roots behind the counter and
brings up an old hat box , thick with dust
and full of "78" gramophone records,
recorded in London and reproduced in
Prussia before the first world war. Beka
Grand, die beste Schallplatte der Welt.
Their labels carry the names of the pop
songs of the day: Mr. Stanley Kirk by,
Baritone, singing "Our hands have met
but not our hearts." Mr. Alan Turner,
Baritone, singing Balfe's "The Heart
Bowed Down." Mr. Sidney Barnes singing
"In the Evening by the Moonlight, dear
Louise."
"I see you're fond of old things,"
says Peter, and takes out of a Twilfit
corset box a piece of thin rubber tubing.
"It's a German Catalyst," he explained.
"I used to draw the waters for my
father when he'd go to a fair. He was the
best judge of cattle there was in Burris."
It is in fact a catheter, such as elderly
farmers with prostate trouble used to
carry rolled in their hatbands, against the
drinking session that would follow the
sale of a beast. What wonderful object
will he produce next?
"My father got this house for nothing
from the landlord: from the Cripple,"
says Peter. "He was a sergeant in the
R.I.C. and was well got with the 'Big
House.' When he left the force he set
up this shop." He looks round appraisingly
at the dust-laden shelves, the faded
advertisements for Clarke's Perfect Plug
and Mac's Smile Blades, the well-worn
butcher's block that saw much use a long
time ago. "There was a time when this
shop was too small for all the people
that would be in it. I have an old piano
upstairs. Would you like to see it?"
But it is time for me · to continue my
journey down the river. I go out into the
street, where the neat stone cottages
climb up and down the hill, and make
my way through the trees to the lock
where I have left my boat. Behind me
the old house broods; its rows of windows
staring out over the valley. And
back in his shop that sells nothing, the
old man goes behind his counter again,
and waits.
